C  Agreement By and Between Teamsters Local Union No. 25    Representing The Borough of Mount Oliver Police Department And The Borough of Mount Oliver January 1 22 through December 31 222      Tabe of Contents  ARTICLENO. 1 - RECOGNITION.

1 ARTICLENO. 2 - INTENT AND PlJRPOSE .

1  ARTICLENO. 3 -1ANAGEMENT RIGHTS.

! ARTICLENO. 4- PROBATIONARYEMPLOYEES.

1 ARTICLENO. 5- HOURSOF WORK .

2  ARTICLENO. 7 - HOLIDAYS.

3 ARTICLE NO. 8 - PERSONAL DAYS.

3  JR.TICLENO. 9 - LONGEV11YPAY.

4 ARTICLENO. I- UNIFORM ALLOVANCE .

4 ARTICLE NO. 11- B1.JL.LET PROOF VEST .

4  AllTICLENO. 12- EMERGENCYLEAVE .

5 ARTICLE NO. 13-JURY DUTY LEAVES.

S  AR.TJCLENO.14-MD.ITARY SERVICE.

5    ARTICLE NO. 16 - SICK LEA VE .

6 ARTICLE NO. 18 - BEREAVEMENTLEAVE .

7  ARTICLE NO. 19- VACATIONS.

7  ARTICLENO. 2 - HOSPITALIZATION AND LIFE INSURANCE.

8 ARTICLE NO. 21 - HEALTH AND SAFETY EQUIPMENT.

l ARTICLE NO. 22-COURT APPEARANCE.

1 ARTICLE NO. 23 - BILL OF RIGHTS.

IO ARTICLE NO. 24  PENSION.

1t ARTlCLE NO. 25 - SEPARABil.ITYAND SAVINGS.

11 ARTICLE NO. 26- DRUG ALCOHOLAND SEXUAL HARASSMENTPOLICIES.l J  ARTICLENO. 27 - MAINTENANCEOF MEffiERSHIP.

12 ARTICLE NO. 28- JOB STEWARDS.

12  ARTICLENO. 29- PART-TIJrvfE PATROLMAN.

13 ARTICLE NO. 3-CANINE AGREEMENT.

15  ARTlCLENO. 31 - EFFECTNE DATES .

16    AGREEMENT This Agreement is made and entered into this 1st day of January 22 by and between the Borough of Mt. Oliver Allegheny County Pennsylvania hereinafter referred to as the BOROUGH or the EMPLOYER and the Service Personnel and Employees of the Dairy Industry Teamsters Local Union No. 25 affiliated with the International Brotherhood of Teamsters hereinafter referred to as the UNION.

 WITNESSETH ARTICLE NO. I-RECOGNITION The Borough recognizes Teamsters Local Union No. 25 is the exclusive representative of the employes of the above-named Employer in the unit described below for the purpose of collective bargaining with respect to wages hours and other terms and conditions of employment pursuant to the Certification of Representation by the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board in accordance with the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Act and Act 111 of 1968 in Case No PF-R18-12-W.

   All full-time and regular part-time police officers including but not limited to patrol officers sergeants and lieutenants and excluding the chief of police and any other managerial employes.

ARTICLE NO. 2 - INTENT AND PURPOSE It is the intent and purpose of the parties hereto to set forth herein the basic Agreement  covering rates of pay hours of work and condition of employment to be observed between the parties hereto.

ARTICLE NO. 3 - MANAGEMENT RIGHTS The Management direction and control of the Mt. Oliver Borough Police Force is vested exclusively in the Borough subject to Civil Service Rules and Regulations which has the right to hire suspend discharge promote demote schedule and transfer its employees and to make such rules relating to its operation as it deems advisable subject to the provisions of this Agreement.

ARTICLE NO. 4 - PROBATIONARY EMPLOYEES    All new employees covered by this Agreement shall be probationary employees commencing from the date of employment and continuing for a period of twelve (12) months during which time they may be summarily suspended or discharged by the Borough. If a probationary employee is retained beyond twelve (12) months period his or her seniority shall date back to the date of employment and he or she shall be classified as a regular employee.

 C  ARTICLE NO. 5 - HOURS OF WORK A.

 All full-time Police Officers shall work a forty (4) hour week consisting of five (5) eight (8) hour days. The workweek shall be the period beginning at 121 A.M. Sunday until 12 midnight on the Saturday following.

 8.

 The normal hours of work shall be forty (4) hours per week. The daily hours of work shall be eight (8) consecutive hours.

 C.

 Employees shall be paid at one and one-half (1-) times the regular rate of pay for hours worked in excess of forty (4) straight time hours per week.

 D.

 If employees are called out for a Special Detail approved by the Chief of Police employees shall be paid a minimum of four (4) hours at one and one-half (I-) times the regular rate of pay. If employees work over four (4) hours during a Special Detail employees shall be paid at one and one-half (1-) times the regular rate of pay for each additional hour worked.

 E.

 Overtime pay shall be paid on the regular payday for the period in which the over time is worked.

 F.

 The starting time on daily or weekly work schedules Schedule shifts shall be determined by the Mayor and the Chief of Police and may be changed by the Mayor and the Chief of Police from time to time to meet the needs of the Borough and Public Protection provided that the officer(s) affected shall be given at least forty-eight (48) hours notice prior to change. Emergencies and Public Disaster situations are exceptions from this situation.

 G.

 All contracted services authorized by the Borough and the Chief of Police shall be paid at a minimum of (4) hours. Examples of this duty include all road contractors and private enterprises wishing to utilize Police Officers for security purposes in the Borough. All opportunities for a detail rate assignment generated by outside events shall be posted by the Chief of Police as a changing rotation.

The post shall include a description of the detail along with the rate of pay. The Officer shall be compensated at the base detail rate of sixty dollars ($6.) per hour and shall be paid a minimum of four (4) hours. The detail rate shall be adjusted thereafter on an annual basis and reflected in the adoption of the Boroughs annual Fee Schedule. No Officer shall be removed for his normal scheduled Patrol to work a contracted service when the detail has been posted in advance and is not a threat to public safety. This decision shall be made at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

 H.

 In the absence of a ranking officer or the Chief of Police the most senior officer on shift shall be designated as Officer in Charge and shall be paid for an additional hour at one and one-half ( 1-12) times the regular rate of pay.

     2     ARTICLE NO. 6-RATES A.

 OF PAY 1-1-2  1-1-21  1-1-22  Sergeants  $28.

 $29.

 $3.

 Corporals  $25.5  $26.5  $27.5  Patrolman  $23.5  $24.5  $25.5  If any additional categories are added the parties shall meet to negotiate the rates of pay.

B.

 New Employees Wage Schedule New Hire 8  1 Year 9  2 Years 1  ARTICLE NO. 7 - HOLIDAYS    A.

 Holidays will apply to full-time employees only.

 B.

 The following nine (9 days shall be considered holidays  New Years Day Memorial Day Labor Day Thanksgiving Employees Birthday  Easter Independence Day Veterans Day Christmas  C.

 Full-time employees required to work on the holidays enumerated above shall be paid one and one-half (1  times their regular rate of pay plus eight (8) hours of holiday pay for a total of two and one-half (2  times their regular rate.

 D.

 For the purpose of determining whether an employee has worked five (5) days in his or her regularly scheduled workweek holidays shall not be considered as a fifth (5) day worked. If holiday falls on a scheduled day off officer shall receive eight (8) hours straight pay.

 E.

 No employee shall Call Off the day immediately before after or the day of a scheduled holiday.

 ARTICLE NO. 8 - PERSONAL DAYS    A total of four (4) paid days each year for personal matters and such days shall be noncumulative and shall be requested in writing twenty-four (24) hours prior to intended use. When  3    an employee reaches three (3) years of full-time service heshe shall receive an additional personal day for a total of five (5) personal days per year. In case of an emergency the Chief of Police may authorize a personal day with less than twenty-four (24) hour notice. Such schedule changes necessitated by the use of personal days shall not constitute contract violations by the employer. Personal days (or parts thereof) shall not constitute overtime.

ARTICLE NO. 9- LONGEVITY PAY  When employees reach five (5) years of full-time service employees shall receive Longevity Pay. Payment shall be applied during the first pay period during the month of November to all eligible employees in accordance with the table below.

 5-9 years 1-14  years 15-19 years  $125 $15 $175  ARTICLE NO. 1- UNIFORM ALLOWANCE A.

 Upon hire all full time employees shall be issued a uniform consisting of four (4) shirts two (2) short sleeve and two (2) long sleeve) and two (2) pairs of pants.

Uniforms shall be provided and paid in full by the employer. Said uniforms are property of the Borough. Employees shall reimburse the Borough for the uniform if no longer employed at the end of the one ( l) year probationary period.

 B.

 Employees who have reached at least one (1) year of full-time service shall receive an allowance in the amount of five hundred and fifty dollars ($55. per year that may be spent on any clothing or equipment the employee may need in the line of duty approved by the Chief of Police. This allowance shall not rollover to the next year and any amount that an employee does not use shall be absorbed back into the Boroughs General Funds.

   ARTICLE NO. 11 - BULLET PROOF VEST  A.

 The Borough shall purchase all newly-hired full-time employees a bullet proof vest. Employees shall reimburse the Borough for the cost of the vest if no longer employed at the end of the one ( 1year probationary period.

 B.

 The Borough shall purchase all full-time employees a bullet proof vest on a rotating basis as determined by the Chief of Police. Vests purchased by the  Borough are property of the Borough and shall be returned to the Borough when vests expire andor when employee is no longer employed by the Borough.

  4    ARTICLE NO. 12 - EMERGENCY LEAVE Emergency Leave may be taken by an employee without pay if a personal emergency is experienced by himself or herself or a member of his or her immediate family as defined in other sections. Notice shall be given to the Chief of Police at the earliest possible time.

 ARTICLE NO. 13 - JURY DUTY LEAVES  If a full-time employee is required to be on Jury Duty he or she shall receive on a daily basis the difference between his or her compensation as a Juror and what he or she would have received had he or she been on the job. The purpose of this Article is to enable the Employee to meet civic responsibility without suffering a monetary loss.

ARTICLE NO. 14 - MILITARY SERVICE All full-time employees who entered the Armed Services of the United States or who have left or who subsequent to the date hereof leave their position for the purpose of being inducted into enlisting in determining their physical fitness to enter or to perform training duty in said Armed Forces shall be reinstated in accordance with the applicable Federal Statutes.

 ARTICLE NO. 15 - SENIORITY    A.

 Layoffs shall be made from among full-time employees in inverse order of Seniority beginning with Patrolman and up to Sergeant.

 B.

 Recalls from layoff shall be made first from the Sergeants in order of seniority then Patrolman in the order of Seniority.

 C.

 Layoffs (in order of inverse seniority as described above) recalls after vacations and work schedules shall be in accordance with rank in the order of seniority.

 D.

 Full-time employees who are laid off because of lack of work or who are absent because of disability or approved leave shall retain and accumulate service during such absence for a period of one ( 1) year.

 E.

 Leaves of absence in excess of thirty (3) days shall not be granted unless such individual leave is approved by the Borough. Any employee engaged in any employment during a leave of absence shall lose his seniority.

 F.

 Full-time employees who are discharged for cause or quit of their own accord lose rank and seniority rights as of the date of such discharge or quit.

 G.

 For full-time employees seniority shall be determined by years of service.

 C 5    ARTICLE NO. 16 - SICK LEA VE  A.

 Full-time employees shall earn ten (1) days of sick leave entitlement per year effective January I of the calendar year and may accumulate unused sick leave days up to a maximum of one hundred (1) days.

 B.

 When an employee reaches five (5) years of full-time service heshe shall receive an additional two (2) sick days for a total of twelve (12) sick days per year.

 C.

 Proof of illness in the form of a medical certificate shall be required if an employee is absent for more than two (2) consecutive days.

 D.

 Upon any severance of employment employees shall be reimbursed in the amount of fifty percent (5) of the current daily rate for all accumulated unused sick days up to a maximum of one hundred (1) days. Upon death of an employee hisher designated beneficiary shall be reimbursed at one hundred percent (1) of the employees current daily rate.

 E.

 Upon reaching accumulation of one hundred (I ) days the employee may sell back all additional days at twenty-five percent (25) of their regular hourly rate.

 ARTICLE NO. 17 - GRIEVANCES    Should any differences arise between the Borough and the Department as to the meaning and application of this Agreement there shall be no suspension of work and the Department will not cause or permit to take part in a slowing down of work but an earnest effort shall be made to settle such difference immediately in the following manner.

STEP ONE If the Officer shall fail to secure satisfaction from his or her superior officer he or she may submit his or her complaint in writing to the Chief of Police within five (5) days who shall hear such complaint and render a decision on the matter in writing within five (5) days thereafter.

STEP TWO If the Officer shall fail to secure satisfaction at Step One the Union or the officer shall within ten (I ) days file an appeal to the Mayor and within ten ( 1) days the Mayor shall schedule a meeting with the officer and his Union Representative to discuss the matter. The Mayor shall render a decision in writing within five (5) days thereafter.

STEP THREE If the Officer shall fail to secure satisfaction at Step Two the Union or the officer shall within ten (1) days file an appeal to Council and within ten 1) days schedule a meeting with the officer and his Union Representative to discuss the matter. Council shall render a decision in writing within five (5) days thereafter.

   STEP FOUR In the event no agreement is reached at Step Three the Union may upon written notice to Council within ten ( I ) days request the grievance be submitted to Arbitration. If the parties cannot agree upon an Arbitrator a request shall be submitted to the American Arbitration 6    Association to provide a panel of seven (7) Arbitrators which shall be limited to arbitrators who reside in Western Pennsylvania and who are members of the National Academy of Arbitrators.

The parties shall alternately strike from the list until an Arbitrator is chosen. The cost of the Arbitration including the expense of the Arbitrator the hearing room and the transcript of the testimony of the hearing transcribed shall be split equally by the Borough and the Union.

ARTICLE NO. 18 - BEREAVEMENT LEAVE  A.

 All Officers shall be entitled to the following paid bereavement leave.

 1. Four (4) days in the event of the death of the following persons Current spouse children parents siblings current mother-in-law or father-in-law grandparents step-parent or legal guardian current brother- or sister-in-law.

2. One (1) day in the event of the death of the following persons Uncle Aunt Niece Nephew.

8.

   The period during which an employee may utilize his or her paid bereavement leave shall be no earlier than (and including) the date of death of the named relative.

 ARTICLE NO. 19 - VACATIONS A.

 An eligible Full-time employee who completes the years of continuous service  indicated in the following table shall receive a vacation corresponding to such years of continuous service.

 C  YEARS OF SERVICE  VACATIONS  6MONTHS 2YEARS 4 YEARS lYEARS 15YEARS  1 WEEK 2WEEKS 3WEEKS 4WEEKS SWEEKS  8.

 Each week of vacation shall be five (5) consecutive days.

 C.

 Vacations shall be non-cumulative.

 D.

 Employees shall be required to take time off for their Vacation. Once vacations are scheduled and approved they may not be changed without approval of the Mayor and Chief of Police.

 E.

 Scheduling of vacations shall be in the exclusive control and discretion of the Mayor and the Chief of Police. However each employee shall be afforded the 7    opportunity or right of selection of vacation by rank with the highest ranking officer selecting his or her requested time first and so on in line of rank or if more than one officer of the same rank in order of seniority. A tentative schedule shall be posted on or before January I of each year with the officer making his selection in accordance with his rank. The selected periods are all subject to the approval by the Mayor and the Chief of Police to insure prudent management of the work force and the Public safety of the Borough of Mt. Oliver. No more than one (1) employee of the same rank shall be permitted to be on vacation at any one time except at the discretion of the Mayor and the Chief of Police. The final Schedule shall be posted on or before March I in each year.

 F.

 All employees covered under this Agreement shall pick the first week of their vacation by rank or if more than one employee of the same rank in order of seniority and in a timely manner. No one is to pick additional weeks until this is done. If an employee has not selected hisher first week within seven (7) days from prior senior officers selection or two (2) days thereafter for subsequent weeks then it shall be at the discretion of the Mayor and the Chief of Police to skip that employee and move to the next highest seniority employee. After this has been done those entitled to additional weeks shall do so in accordance with the above example.

 ARTICLE NO. 2 - HOS PIT ALIZA TI ON AND LIFE INSURANCE    A.

 The Borough will provide hospitalization and medical insurance including dental and vision coverage for all full-time employees and their dependents including their spouses and children up to age twenty-six (26).

The Borough shall have the right to change existing medical hospitalization dental and vision insurance to a plan that is comparable to the coverage which is presently being provided. Comparable in this context does not mean exactly the same. The employees however retain the right to grieve the Boroughs detennination that the plan is comparable. If the Union does not agree that a plan selected by the Borough is comparable it will so state in writing to the Borough within fourteen (14) calendar days of the plan being provided to the employees by the Borough or such longer period as mutually agreed to by the parties in writing.

In that event the Borough may not unilaterally implement the proposed new plan however it may immediately process the dispute before a neutral arbitrator selected pursuant to the arbitration step of the grievance procedure. The decision of the arbitrator on the issue of comparability shall be issued within forty-five (45) calendar days of the Unions written notice contesting that the plan selected by the Borough is comparable and shall be final and binding and will detennine if the Borough is authorized to implement the new plan.

 8.

   The Employer shall pay all deductibles in full for the Medical Plan through the administration of an HRA. The Employees shall pay premium contributions in accordance with the following schedule 8    22 5 of the annual premium 221 7.5 of the annual premium 222 7.5 of the annual premium C.

 Life Insurance coverage in the face amount of $25. shall be provided with a $3. policy to be in effect for each full-time employee upon retirement.

 D.

 False arrest insurance shall be provided no less than $3. liability limits.

 E.

 If an employee does not accept the Employers Hospitalization and Medical Insurance due to that Employee already has Hospitalization and Medical Insurance other than the Employers this shall not prevent an Employee from at any time accepting the Employers Hospitalization and Medical Coverage to the extent permitted by law and the requirements of the plan and carrierinsurer.

 F.

 Either Party shall have the right to re-open the provisions of Article 2 during the fourth quarter of each calendar year of this Agreement.

 G.

 We are requesting the employer provide and pay for the Teamsters Legal Defense Fund a criminal and civil defense insurance for all officers. The current cost of the benefit is eighty-six dollars and eighty-eight cents ($86.88) annually per officer.

 H.

 The Borough will offer an Opt-Out Program for the Medical Plan in which eligible employees may elect to participate in. Employees who choose to participate in the Program shall receive a payment in the amount of fifty percent (5) of the Employees annual premium less the annual employee contribution.

Payment shall be made in two installments where the first installment shall be paid on or before December I st and the second installment on or before May I st.

 I.

 The Borough will provide a reimbursable vision plan that shall include one (I) eye exam every two (2) years covered in full and up to two hundred and fifty dollars ($25.) per year for frames lenses and contacts.

 J.

 If the Borough receives notice or information indicating that its health care plan      costs will subject the plan to the Affordable Care Acts Cadillac Tax excise tax the Borough will give the Union written notice of that fact and the parties will immediately meet to discuss changes in the plan design plan andor plan carrier in order to avoid the imposition of the tax. If no agreement is reached within fourteen (14) days of the Boroughs written notice to the Union regarding this issue then the parties will proceed to an expedited arbitration proceeding with an arbitrator selected pursuant to the terms of the ColJective Bargaining Agreements grievance and arbitration procedure.

The sole purpose for that expedited arbitration proceeding will be for the arbitrator to modify the plan plan design andor plan carrier in order to eliminate the exposure to the Cadillac Tax. The 9  decision of the arbitrator on this issue shall be issued within forty (4) calendar days of his or her appointment.

ARTICLE NO. 21-HEALTH  AND SAFETY EQUIPMENT  The Borough shall continue to make reasonable provisions for the safety and health of its employees during the hours of their employment. The Borough shall provide protective devices and other equipment necessary to properly protect employees in the accordance with the practice now prevailing in order to insure safety.

ARTICLE NO. 22 - COURT APPEARANCE  t)  A.

 An Officer required to attend Court Criminal Court Federal Court Juvenile Court Appeals Court 32 Hearings Coroners Inquests shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours pay at the rate of one and one-half (1 ) times the officers hourly rate.

 B.

 An Officer required to attend Magistrate Hearings shall receive a minimum of three (3) hours pay at the rate of one and one-half (1 ) times the officers hourly rate.

 C.

 If two (2) courts are scheduled on the same day any combined hour in attendance over and above the minimum shall be paid at the rate of one and one-half (1 ) times the officers hourly rate. If two (2) courts are scheduled at the same time the officer shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours pay at the rate of one and one-half (1 ) times the officers hourly rate plus this same rate for each additional hour past four (4) hours.

 D.

 The Officer shall keep his or her witness fees and the Borough shall not reimburse Officers for travel time. Officers are not required to use their personal vehicles so they will not be reimbursed for parking. Court time shall not count as hours worked for computing overtime. Verification of attendance at Court for any appearance is to be submitted to the Borough.

 ARTICLE NO. 23 - BILL OF RIGHTS  A.

 When an anonymous complaint is made against a police officer and no corroborative evidence is obtained the complaint shall be classified as unfounded.

 B.

 When any citizen complaint is filed greater than six (6) months after the date of the alleged event complaint of. which if true could not lead to a criminal charge such complaint shalJ be classified as unfounded and the accused employee shall not be required to submit a written report but shall be notified oralJy or in writing of such claim.

 () JO    C.

 A Police Officer whether a subject or witness must be informed of the nature of the interrogation if it might involve a violation of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code at the outset of the interrogation or interview.

 D.

 If the interrogated Police Officer writes a written statement a transcript is taken or mechanical record made a copy of the same must be given to the interrogated Police Officer without cost upon request.

 E.

 If any Police Office under interrogation is under arrest or is likely to be placed under arrest as a result of the interrogation he or she shall be completely informed of all his or her rights prior to the commencement of the interrogation.

 F.

 Any Police Officer shall have the right to review his personnel file upon reasonable advance notice to the Chief of Police.

 G.

 All complaints involving Police Officer conduct or behavior while in the line of duty shall be in writing from and submitted by the complainant to the Chief of Police.

 H.

 Employer agrees that any and all disciplinary actions in the form of oral reprimands with written notation shall be removed from the employee personnel file after twelve (12) months if a similar infraction has not occurred within that period. Similarly any and all disciplinary actions in the form of written reprimands shall be removed from the employee personnel file after twenty-four (24) months if a similar infraction has not occurred within that period.

Suspensions shall remain in the employee personnel file in perpetuity.

   ARTICLE NO. 24 - PENSION  The Borough shall provide continued pension benefits for all full-time employees in accordance with Act 6 and the Mt. Oliver Police Pension Plan as amended from time to time.

ARTICLE NO. 25- SEPARABILITY AND SAVINGS  In the event any of these terms or provisions of this Agreement shall be found invalid or declared unenforceable by reason of any Federal or State statute or Federal or State directive rule or regulation now in effect or hereinafter to become effective or by reason of the decision of any Federal or State Court such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect or impair any other terms or provisions hereof unless the other terms or provisions are directly affected by the section declared invalid or unenforceable. The parties thereupon may within thirty (3) days meet to discuss said invalidity or unenforceability.

ARTICLE NO. 26 - DRUG ALCOHOL AND SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICIES    A.

 The Mt. Oliver Police Department Standard Operating Guidelines as amended from time to time shall be a part of this Agreement.

 11    work interference or has acted in a matter indicating hisher approval of same in violation of this Agreement.

 D.

 The Borough shall at no time be responsible for payment to the Job Steward for job steward duties and activities that take place while the officer is off duty.

 ARTICLE NO. 29-PART-TIME  PATROLMAN  A.

 Intent and Purpose It is the intent and purpose of the Borough of Mt. Oliver to set forth herein the basic information covering rates of pay hours of work and condition of employment to be observed between the Borough of Mt. Oliver and Part Time Patrolman.

 B.

 Management Rights The Management direction and control of the Mt. Oliver Borough Police Force is vested exclusively in the Borough which has the right to hire suspend discharge promote demote schedule and transfer its employees and to make such rules relating to its operation as it deems advisable. All part time employees are at will and can be terminated at any time per the needs of Mt.

Oliver Borough.

 c.

 Hours of Work The starting time on daily or weekly work schedules Schedule shifts shall be determined by the Mayor and the Chief of Police and may be changed by the Mayor and the Chief of Police from time to time to meet the needs of the Borough and Public Protection provided that the officer(s) affected shall be given at least forty-eight (48) hours notice prior to change. Emergencies and Public Disaster situations are exceptions from this situation.

 D.

 Rates of Pay    1STYEAR $15.

 E.

 3RDYEAR  zNYEAR $15.

 $15.

 Holidays The following seven (7) days shall be considered holidays New Years Day Memorial Day Labor Day Christmas  Easter Independence Day Thanksgiving Day  1. Part-time employees required to work on the holidays enumerated above shall be paid one and one-half ( 1 ) times their regular rate of pay only when worked.

2. No employee shall Call Off the day immediately before after or the day of a scheduled holiday.

  13    F.

 Personal Days Part-time employees shall be entitled to receive one (1) paid day each year for personal matters after two (2) years of service. Such days shall be non-cumulative and shall be requested in writing twenty-four (24) hours prior to intended use. When an employee reaches three (3) years of service heshe shall receive an additional personal day for a total of two (2) personal days per year.

 G.

 Uniform Allowance 1. Upon hire all part time employees shall be issued a uniform consisting of four (4)  shirts two (2) short sleeve and two (2) long sleeve and two (2) pairs of pants.

Uniforms shall be provided and paid in full by the employer. Said uniforms are property of the Borough. Employees shall reimburse the Borough for the uniform ifno longer employed at the end of one (1) year.

2. Employees who have reached at least one (1) year of service and work an average of sixteen (16) hours per week shall receive an allowance in the amount of two hundred and fifty dollars ($25.) per year that may be spent on any clothing or equipment the employee may need in the line of duty approved by the Chief of Police. This allowance shall not roll-over to the next year and any amount that an employee does not use shall be absorbed back into the Boroughs General Funds.

   H.

 Military Service All employees who entered the Armed Services of the United States or who have left or who subsequent to the date hereof leave their position for the purpose of being inducted into enlisting in determining their physical fitness to enter or to perform training duty in said Armed Forces shall be reinstated in accordance with the applicable Federal Statutes.

 I.

 Sick Leave Part-time employees shall be entitled to one (I) day of sick leave per year after one (1) year of service. When an employee reaches three (3) years of service heshe shall receive an additional day for a total of two (2) sick days per year. Sick days may be accumulated and proof of illness shall be required if an employee is absent for more than one ( 1) day.

 J.

 Bereavement Leave Part-time Officers shall be entitled to one ( 1) day paid bereavement leave.

 K.

 Vacations  1. Part-time employees shall not be entitled to paid vacations.

 2. Any time requested off by a Part-time Officer shall be unpaid leave. This will be in writing and submitted to the Chief of Police.

   L.

 Health and Safety Equipment The Borough shall continue to make reasonable provisions for the safety and health of its employees during the hours of their  14    employment. The Borough shall provide protective devices and other equipment necessary to properly protect employees in order to insure safety.

 M.

 Court Appearance  1. An Officer required to attend Court Criminal Court Federal Court Juvenile Court Appeals Court 32 Hearings Coroners Inquests shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours pay at the rate of one and one-half (1 ) times the officers hourly rate.

2. An Officer required to attend Magistrate Hearings shall receive a minimum of  three (3) hours pay at the rate of one and one-half (1-) times the officers hourly rate.

3. If two (2) courts are scheduled on the same day any combined hour in attendance over and above the minimum shall be paid at the rate of one and a half (1- ) times the officers hourly rate. If two (2) courts are scheduled at the same time the officer shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours pay at the rate of one and one-half (1-) times the officers hourly rate plus this same rate for each additional hour past four (4) hours.

4. The Officer shall keep his or her witness fees and the Borough shall not reimburse Officers for travel time. Officers are not required to use their personal vehicles so they will not be reimbursed for parking. Court time shall not count as hours worked for computing overtime. Verification of attendance at Court for any appearance is to be submitted to the Borough.

   ARTICLE NO. 3 - CANINE AGREEMENT  A.

 The Canine Handler shall perform such duties as shall be assigned to him by the Chief of Police and in conjunction with the job description of a Mt. Oliver Borough Police Officer.

 B.

 The Canine Handler will be compensated at the applicable rate specified in the collective bargaining agreement except as follows  1. The Canine Handler shall receive an additional two thousand and four hundred dollars ($24.) per year and shall be paid at a rate of two hundred dollars ($2.) per month.

 c.

   The Canine Handler shall be responsible for the care and maintenance of the Police K-9 Dog including but not limited to the following 1. All food for the Dog without reimbursement.

 15    2. Other expenses associated with routine care and maintenance such as professional grooming and kenneling with reimbursement up to seven hundred and fifty dollars ($75.) per year upon submission of receipts to the Borough.

Reimbursement of any accumulated expenses beyond seven hundred and fifty dollars ($75.) in any (I) year period must be approved by Borough Council.

 D.

 The Borough shall be responsible for the following 1. Initial Purchase and training of the Dog.

2. Certifications and annual association dues.

3. Necessary equipment.

4. Medical care.

5. General liability and medical insurance.

   E.

 The schedule of the Canine Handler shat I be determined by the Chief of Police in consideration of the needs of the Police Department and to allow sufficient time for the Canine Handler to attend to the care and maintenance needs of the Dog during the Canine Handlers scheduled shift times. Overtime for the purpose of care and maintenance of the dog is not permitted unless authorized in writing by the Chief of Police.

 F.

 The Canine Handler may be required to respond as necessary to calls for assistance during time which are outside his normal workday schedule and shall be compensated for such in accordance with the collective bargaining agreement.

 ARTICLE NO. 31-EFFECTIVE  DATES  f  This Agreement shall become effective as of January I 22 and shall continue in effect to and including midnight of December 31  K.Party may in accordance with the provisions of Act 111 give notice to the other thedesire to negotiate with respect to the terms and condition of a New Agreement.

 TEAMSTERS LOCAL UNION NO. 25  FOR THE EMPLOYER  Date  Date   16  Rick Hopkinson rick.hopkinsonmtoliver.com  Collective Bargaining Agreement Clerical Error 1 message  Rachelle Brewster rachelleteamsters25.com To Rick Hopkinson rick.hopkinsonmtoliver.com Cc Tom.snydermtoliver.com Tom.snydermtoliver.com  Thu Nov 21 219 at 158AM  Good morning We received the CBA and upon entering it into my file I noticed the following clerical error  ARTICLE NO. 31 - EFFECTIVE DATES  This Agreement shall become effective as of January 1 22 and shall continue in effect to and including midnight of December 31 22. Either party may in accordance with the provisions of Act 111 give notice to the other party of the desire to negotiate with respect to the terms and condition of a New Agreement.

   The agreement lists the correct date on the cover page of the CBA. I spoke with Carl and he is requesting the Borough scratch out the incorrect date under Article 31 and write in the correct expiration date of222 and initial it and we will do the same. We will also be keeping a copy of this email for our records.

If you have any questions please call the Union Office.

Thank you  Rachelle L. Brewster Administrative Assistant Teamsters Local Union No. 25 Office 412-751-7988 FaC412-751-159 rachelleteamsters 25. com    
