AGREEMENT SOUTH FAYETTE TOWNSHIP AND SOUTH FAYETTE POLICE DEPARTMENT January 1 221 - December 31 225   ARTICLE OF AGREEMENT MADE AND ENTERED into this  day of  221 by and between the TOWNSHIP OF SOUTH FAYETTE a municipal corporation of the County of Allegheny and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (hereinafter referred to as the Township) AND The SOUTH FAYETTE TOWNSHIP POLICE WAGE AND POLICY UNIT on behalf of itself and also all of the police of South Fayette Township County of Allegheny and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (hereinafter referred to as the Police) WITNESSETH WHEREAS it is the desire of the parties to provide fair and equitable hours wages working conditions and to establish preserve and promote harmonious and mutually beneficial relations and WHEREAS the Board of Commissioners of South Fayette Township intends to legally bind the Township of South Fayette to the terms of this Agreement and WHEREAS all of the policemen including the officers of the Township of South Fayette intend to be legally bound by this Agreement.

NOW THEREFORE in consideration of the foregoing and the mutual promises contained herein it is hereby agreed as follows   221-225 POLICE CONTRACT INDEX ARTICLEPAGE TERM3 COMPENSATION3-4 LONGEVITY5 EDUCATION5 COURT ATTENDANCE6 CLOTHING ALLOWANCE6-7 RETIREMENT7 VACATION7-8 HOLIDAYS8-9 SICK LEAVE9-1 PERSONAL DAYS1 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE1-11 WORK DAY OR SHIFT TRADES11 INSURANCE11-12 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES12-14 RECOGNITION14 UNION SECURITYAGENCY SHOP CLAUSE14-15 PENSION AND SOCIAL SECURITY OFFSET15 MISCELLANEOUS15-17 SIGNATURES18 EXHIBIT A19-23   ARTICLE I - TERM 1.This Agreement shall be effective and in force for calendar years beginning January 1 221 and terminating December 31 225.

ARTICLE II - COMPENSATION 1.The following percentage increases will be added to each full-time officers hourly rate as of January 1 2212.

January 1 2222.25 January 1 2232.25 January 1 2242.5 January 1 2253.

Hourly Wages  221 222 223 224 225 Captain $52.17hr ($18519.84 annual) $53.35hr ($11961.54 annual) $54.55hr ($113458.17 annual) $55.91hr ($116294.63 annual) $57.59hr ($119783.46 annual) Lieutenant $5.87hr ($1584.19 annual) $52.1hr ($18184.79 annual) $53.18hr ($11618.94 annual) $54.51hr ($113384.42 annual) $56.15hr ($116785.95 annual) Sergeant $49.4hr ($12749.9 annual) $5.51hr ($156.94 annual) $51.65hr ($17424.81 annual) $52.94hr ($1111.43 annual) $54.53hr ($113413.75 annual) Patrolman $47.87hr ($99566.69 annual) $48.95hr ($1186.94 annual) $5.5hr ($1497.59 annual) $51.3hr ($167.3 annual) $52.84hr ($1991.4 annual)  2.Base patrolman will earn 75 of patrolman wages for year one (1) 85 for year two (2) 95 for year three (3) and then 1 of patrolman base wage in year four (4).

3.Starting patrolman to serve a probationary period as prescribed by the Civil Service Rules and the Board of Commissioners.

4.All Police are to be paid every other Thursday provided however that one weeks pay shall be held back at all times. All police pays are based on salary 26 equal pays per year.

5.The Township shall implement a schedule incorporating twelve hour shifts for those positions other than the SRO Officer during the school year and any other future positions that require a flexible work schedule and which shall include in any two (2) week pay period two (2) workdays within one workweek and five (5) workdays within one workweek. Shifts shall consist of a Day shift from 6 a.m. until 6 p.m. and a Night shift from 6 p.m. until 6 a.m. One of the seven days worked in the pay period shall be scheduled as an eight (8) hour workday.

6.Any officer who works a full twelve (12) hour night shift comprised from 6 p.m. until 6 a.m. shall be paid additional compensation of $2. per day.  No additional compensation shall be paid to anyone working the day shift.   7.Police officers on an eight (8) hour shift schedule shall be compensated at time and one half for work in excess of eight (8) hours per day or forty (4) hours per week. An officer on a twelve (12) hour shift schedule shall receive straight time compensation for eighty (8) hours within a two (2) week pay period. Actual hours worked in excess of twelve (12) hours in any work day or eighty-four (84) hours within a two (2) week pay period shall be compensated at time and one-half. On the eight (8) hour day of the workweek if scheduled by the Chief to work extra four (4) hours time shall be paid as straight time to the officer. Detail work or call outs shall still be paid at overtime rate. Overtime and extra duty list will be posted on the police bulletin board and shall be assigned on an equitable basis.

8.Overtime to fill twelve (12) hour shifts will be called out in two (2) six-hour increments using the Overtime List. Overtime for details and to cover shift hours short of six (6) hours will come off of the Overtime List unless an officer currently on duty or coming on duty is used to fulfill the requirement by extending or adding to a normal duty shift. If an officer is called out for overtime he shall be paid a minimum of four (4) hours of work. Four (4) hours of overtime will be credited to the officers pay even if the actual number of overtime hours worked is less than four (4) hours.

9.All vacancies relevant to overtime shall be filled by full-time members of the Police Department in accordance with seniority. No officer shall be penalized for failing to accept an overtime assignment. The Townships obligation under Article II-9 is fulfilled when the officers are offered the opportunity to work the overtime assignment in accordance with seniority.

1.Members of the Police Department are to be notified at the earliest possible time concerning overtime call-out or extra duty.

11.All extra duty such as traffic control security guard extra work for contractors and other requests for police protection shall be offered to full-time officers first and the pay shall be one and one-half times the regular hourly rate with a minimum of four (4) hours. This will be paid by the contractor or employer to the Township which in turn will add the amount to the officers pay.

12.Compensatory time may be earned at a rate of 1 12 times the actual hours worked and for which overtime would otherwise be paid as set forth above. Comp. time may be taken upon approval of the chief with a minimum of twenty-four (24) hours notice to the chief. The chief of Police shall respond to a request for comp. time within three business days from the date the request is submitted to the chief by the individual officer. The taking of Comp. Time may not result in overtime andor shift shortage unless approved by the Chief. Each officer may accumulate a maximum of 48 hours of Comp. Time. All comp. time must be used within the calendar year earned. All remaining comp. time will be paid at straight time in the last paycheck of each calendar year except that officers may elect to carry up to a maximum of 24 hours into the next calendar year.   13.Non Mandatory Overtime to be scheduled by the chief.

ARTICLE III - LONGEVITY 1.All full-time members of the police department shall receive longevity as follows Year of ServicePercentage Amount 5-81 9-122.

13-153.

16-194.

25.

 ARTICLE IV - EDUCATION 1.The Township shall review all educational opportunities and attempt to provide equitable opportunity for all officers to receive additional training within the confines of the departmental budget departmental needs and staff availability. No officer shall be excluded from receiving consideration for educational opportunities.

2.Any officer attending a full day (six hours or more) of Township approved training on his scheduled day off shall be given an additional day off. The day must be taken within sixty (6) days of being earned. The day may be taken by the officer with 24 hours notice to the Chief of Police and is subject to the same restrictions as an individual vacation day as outlined in Article VIII 8. of this Agreement .

3.The Township will reimburse police officers for 5 of the cost of approved courses where a grade of C has been obtained 6 where a grade B has been obtained and 75 where a grade A has been obtained. All courses must be pre-authorized by the Township Manager. Payment for each course shall be made within 9 days of completion of the course. All officers shall be required to remain with the Township for three (3) years after completion of the course or shall be liable for repayment of any educational costs they received from the Township.

4.Upon completion of the probationary period any police officer having a college degree in any criminal justice related field will be compensated for the highest degree attained by the following schedule Associate Degree-$35 Bachelors Degree-$7 Masters Degree-$15 A criminal justice related field shall include andor be limited to police science criminology sociology psychology corrections police administration and administration of justice or any other area of study agreed to by the Township as benefiting operations of the Police Department. Payment of this item will be made at the Townships discretion on or before July 31st of each year.

ARTICLE V - COURT ATTENDANCE 1.The Township shall pay time and one-half for all off duty appearances at district justice hearings for actual time spent at the hearing. The officer shall receive a minimum of two (2) hours overtime.

2.The Township shall pay time and one-half for all off duty appearances at pre-trial for actual time spent. The officer shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours overtime.

3.The Township shall pay time and one-half for all off duty appearances at criminal juvenile and civil court for actual time spent. The officer shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours overtime.

4.In the event that an officer appears in Court or at a Pre-trail during the officers regularly scheduled shift (while the officer is on duty) the officer shall only be entitled to be compensated at the officers regular rate. Additionally these compensation provisions shall apply to all cases where the Townships officers appear in court proceedings arising in their course of duty including appearances that may result from their cooperation with other police departments.   5.The following twelve (12) hour duty shift adjustments shall be made for Court Attendance A.If an officer is off duty the night prior to a scheduled court-related appearance and the court time is within eight hours of the commencement of hisher 12-hour duty shift that officer shall be required to utilize hisher compensatory time off to offset any hours worked in excess of eighteen hours within a 24-hour period. The officer may elect to use this compensatory time at either the beginning or end of their 12-hour duty shift provided that if the use of compensatory will cause overtime the Township may designate whether the use of compensatory time is at the beginning or end of the shift.

B.If an officer is scheduled for a court-related appearance between two 12-hour duty shifts that officer shall be required to use compensatory time at the beginning of the second 12-hour duty shift should that court-related appearance extend past four hours in length and result in the officer having less than eight hours off between the two shifts. Required amount of compensatory time shall be equal to the number of hours that require the officer to be off for eight hours prior to the commencement of the second 12-hour duty shift.

C.If the officer has completed a 12-hour duty shift and is scheduled for a court-related appearance the following day and the officer is not scheduled to return for another 12-hour shift that day the officer shall be eligible for overtime pay.

ARTICLE VI - CLOTHING ALLOWANCE 1.The uniform allowance is to be $9. per year for the length of the contract with shoes and firearms to be included as part of the uniform. The uniform allowance will be paid by the end of January.

2.Police officers shall have the right to purchase protective vests to be used at their discretion.

3.The Township will reimburse each officer who while involved in the line of duty has any items of personal property damaged or destroyed including uniforms eyewear and firearms (excluding sunglasses personal cell phones and personal pagers). The Township shall only be responsible for the actual repair andor replacement of the exact item andor an item of similar value. It is the responsibility of the individual officer to provide documentation as to the value of the damaged item and comply with the Township accident reporting policy.  The Township shall have the sole discretion to determine if the item should be replaced or repaired.

4.Should the Township decide to change uniforms the initial cost of such replacement shall be the obligation of the Township.

5.The Township upon request shall furnish all officers with one box of 5 shells of practice ammunition per quarter.

6.Employees who are on leave due to a non-work related injury andor a work related injury are not entitled to the payment of their clothing allowance until they have return to full-time duty.

ARTICLE VII - RETIREMENT 1.The Police Retirement Pension Plan is to remain as now presently in force and as updated by ordinance No. 2-21 adopted August 23 21 except as may be modified to incorporate the changes set forth in paragraph 7 below. The percentage of contribution by the Police Officer through payroll shall be inconformity with Act 6 guidelines. The Township shall ensure that the Police Pension Plan is in full compliance with all current and future applicable state acts and any collective bargaining obligations applicable to future changes.

2.At a minimum of every two years an actuarial study of the Police Pension Fund shall be made at the cost of the Township. The Pension Fund shall be reviewed to determine the status and a report shall be provided to each member of the Police Department. Items which shall be covered in the report are assets balances previous year income cost and status of all covered members.

3.A Representative(s) of the Police Pension Committee shall be included in all meetings that relate to the Police Pension Fund matters.

4.Upon the death of a police officer who has retired in accordance with the Townships Pension Plan a $75. death benefit will be provided to the administrator or executor of the officers estate to defray costs and expenses.

5.The Township will contribute $5. per month toward any actual hospitalization policy purchased by any retiring police officer upon presentation of the bill for such actually purchased hospitalization policy. It is understood that the remainder of any premiums so charged by the provider of such coverage will be the responsibility of the retired police officer. This contribution will be made only until the retired police officer becomes eligible for Medicare.

6.The Township shall adopt and institute in Year 29 a three (3) year DROP Pension program as described in Exhibit A of this agreement.

7.All full-time police officers hired on or after 11214 shall be eligible for retirement benefits after reaching age 55 with 25 years of service and their benefit shall be calculated at 5 of the average base pay (including longevity) over the final 3 year period before retirement.

ARTICLE VIII - VACATION 1.Vacations shall be as follows After one (1) year of service8 hours After three (3)  years of service12 hours After ten (1) years of service16 hours After fifteen (15) years of service2 hours After twenty-five (25) years of service24 hours 2.Vacation is Monday through Friday consecutive for those working 8 hour shifts.

3.Vacation week is per calendar week (Sunday through Saturday).

4.  For purposes of scheduling vacations pursuant to this Article VIII an officer on a 12 hour shift schedule shall be required to schedule at least 2-24 consecutive hours off at a time in a week they work a 2 day workweek and shall be required to schedule at least 32-36 consecutive hours off at a time in a week they work a 5 day workweek. Exceptions to this may be granted at the discretion of the Chief of Police Township Manager or their designee if extenuating circumstances are present.

5.

5.With respect to vacation scheduling any leave or vacation taken by the Chief is not to be included in or be considered part of the vacation schedule.

6.There can be a maximum of one (1) police officer on vacation at the same time per patrol squad and one (1) officer per assignment.

7.Police Officers will have the right to take forty (4) hours vacation as individual days off. These vacation days may be taken upon the approval of the Chief with a minimum of 24 hours notice to the Chief. The taking of these vacation days may not result in overtime andor a shift shortage unless approved by the Chief. No more than one officer will be permitted to take an individual vacation day per shift.

8.All vacation is subject to the Townships Police Vacation Time Policy Number 2-23 effective January 27 23.

ARTICLE IX - HOLIDAYS 1.Officers shall be granted eight (8) hours pay for the following holidays and shall receive pay for all said holidays in one (1) lump sum in the pay period preceding Christmas of each year 1.New Years Day6. Labor Day 2.Good Friday7. Veterans Day 3.Easter8. Thanksgiving Day 4.Memorial Day9. Christmas Day 5.Independence Day1. Martin Luther Kings Birthday 2.If an officer is scheduled to work on a holiday they shall receive six (6) hours of straight time pay for each holiday worked for those officers working 12 hours and shall receive four (4) hours of straight time pay for each holiday worked for those working 8 hours . Both the four (4) hours and the six (6) hours of straight time shall be paid as part of the officers holiday pay at the end of the year and as described in Article IX-1 above.  In addition to holiday pay any time actually worked on a holiday will be paid as straight time to the officer on the pay period they actually worked the holiday.  3.All full-time officers shall be permitted to accumulate the holidays to which he is entitled pursuant thereunder or he shall be permitted to take the same as extra vacation as long as the extra vacation does not conflict with the regular vacation schedule or any other officer.

ARTICLE X - SICK LEAVE 1.Sick leave shall be allotted to each full-time member of the Police Department at the rate of 112 hours per calendar year and may be accumulated to 18 hours.  Officers who have accumulated more than 18 hours shall be eligible to retain that higher limit.

  2.A doctors excuse will not be required for the first twenty-four (24) hours of illness for each occurrence.  3.Upon retirement officers hired before January 1 214 will be paid a lump sum for unused sick time as follows Hours Earned prior to January 1 29 shall be paid as follows Unused accumulated sick time -96 hours All hours paid at the regular rate of pay at retirement Unused accumulated sick time 961 to 18 hours Four (4) hours of pay per eight (8) hours of accumulated sick time at the regular rate of pay at retirement Eligible hours earned following January 1 29 will be paid as follows Officer shall be paid for up to one hundred and twelve (112) hours of unused sick time earned and not used in that calendar year at the Officers regular rate of pay. All payments will be made with the last paycheck of each year.

If any officer wishes to place unused sick time earned in that calendar year into their sick pool they must notice the Chief of Police in writing a minimum of two weeks prior to the last scheduled pay of that calendar year. Any hours placed in an officers pool following January 1 29 shall be paid as follows Unused accumulated sick time -96 hours All hours paid at the regular rate of pay at the time the hours were earned.

Unused accumulated sick time 961 to 18 hours  Four (4) hours of pay per eight (8) hours of accumulated sick time at the regular rate of pay at the time the hours were earned.

Officers hired after 11215 shall be entitled to payment for unused sick days earned and not used in that calendar year in excess of 96 hours.  To be eligible for payment the officer must have more than 96 hours accumulated and no payment will be made to an Officer that would take the Officers sick time below 96 hours.

4.If any officer wishes to place unused sick time earned in that calendar year into their sick pool they must notice the Chief of Police in writing a minimum of two weeks prior to the last scheduled pay of that calendar year. For any officer hired before January 1 215 accumulated sick time shall be paid in accordance with the schedule set forth above. For officers hired on or after January 1 215 unused accumulated sick time shall be paid at retirement as follows Unused accumulated sick time -18 hours Four (4) hours of pay per eight (8) hours of accumulated sick time at the regular rate of pay at the time the hours were earned.

5.Accumulated sick leave is not payable to officers who terminate or who are terminated from employment with South Fayette Township. This benefit shall only be paid to Officers who retire in accordance with the Townships Pension Plan.

6.

7.In the event of an active officers death all unused sick days up to  18 hours will be paid to the spouse or benefactor of the police officer at the current hourly rate of pay.

8.In the event of an active officers death in the line of duty all unused sick time shall be paid to his immediate family andor as detailed in the officers estate at the officers current hourly rate.

ARTICLE XI - PERSONAL DAYS 1.All full-time members of the Police Department shall be entitled to 36 hours of personal time per year with pay. An officer has the right to use personal time so long as he gives the Chief twenty-four (24) hours notice as long as no other officer on the same shift has already requested the same day. In the event that two officers on the same shift both request a personal day the Chief has the right to refuse if it creates overtime.  Personal days shall be used in whole day increments.

2.If personal time is not used officers will receive straight time pay for such unused personal time this pay will be included with the holiday pay as in Article IX-1.

3.Personal time may not be used on a contractually designated holiday.

ARTICLE XII - BEREAVEMENT LEAVE 1.Upon notice to the Township of the death of a Police Officers spouse child step-child mother father stepmother stepfather brother sister grandparent mother-in-law and father-in-law the Police Officer shall be entitled to four (4) consecutive days off beginning the day following the day of the death and work days scheduled in that four (4) day period will be compensated at full pay.  If the officer was previously scheduled for any personal vacation holiday or compensatory time within the four (4) day period that time will be returned to the officer and the time shall be paid.  Payment for funeral leave shall be at the Police Officers basic straight time rate.

2.A Police Officer shall qualify for up to 12 hours off with pay upon notice to the Township of the death of the officers brother-in-law sister-in-law uncle aunt nephew niece or grandparent-in-law. Payment for funeral leave shall be at the Police Officers basic straight-time rate.

3.Officers shall receive one (1) day off with pay when requested to be pall bearer at the funeral of a fellow officer.

ARTICLE XIII - WORK DAY OR SHIFT TRADES 1.  An officer may switch shifts not more than once per month to be approved at the discretion of the Chief. Shifts may only be switched for the same hour shift i.e. 12 hour for 12 hour or 8 hour for 8 hour. Exceptions to this may be granted at the discretion of the Chief of Police Township Manager or their designee if extenuating circumstances are present.

2.Traded work day or work shift assignments will be with the approval of the Chief of Police and with a minimum of 24 hours notice. Exceptions will be for just cause or emergency.

3.Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary the trading of work day or work shifts shall be permitted ONLY in the event that the work day of work shift trade does not cause the Township to incur any intentional overtime expense.

ARTICLE XIV - INSURANCES 1.Starting January 1 221 the Employer shall furnish and pay for 92.75 of premium for high option hospitalization medical family eye care and dental program for all current employees and their dependents. The Employee shall be responsible to pay the other 7.25 of the premium.  If at any point during the contract a police officers monthly contribution towards health care exceeds 2 of the their average base wage (year 3 wages) the Township shall be responsible for the additional cost  The Township shall also maintain an HSA Program to fund employees 1 of qualified deductibles as described in the official HSA Plan document.

2.The life insurance coverage is to remain as currently in force ($75.).

3.Off-duty sickness and accident short-term and long-term disability insurance will be purchased by the Township and shall be provided to all full-time members of the Police Department. The benefits shall be as follows Short-term Maximum Weekly Benefits$1 Maximum Benefit Period18 Days Long-term Maximum Monthly Benefit$3 Maximum Benefit Period2 Years 4.The Township shall provide false arrest insurance coverage as presently in effect.

5.Any full-time officer can elect to be deleted from the township health insurance plan subject to that police officer presenting proof of similar insurance from another source. In the event that an officer elects to be removed from the Townships health insurance for any year during the term of this agreement then said officer shall be entitled to and shall be paid compensation in the amount of 5 of his annual allocation. This does not prohibit the said officer from rejoining the health insurance program but subject to the then provisions of the polices in effect.

6.An Officer on approved sick andor non-work related accident leave shall be covered by said approved medical programs for a period of twenty-four (24) months.

7.If the employer receives notice or information indicating that its health care plan costs will subject the plan to the Affordable Care Acts Cadillac Tax excise tax the employer will give the Union written notice of that fact and the parties will immediately negotiate changes in the plan design plan andor plan carrier in order to avoid the imposition of the tax. If no agreement is reached within fourteen (14) days of the employers written notice to the Union regarding this issue then the parties will proceed to an expedited interest arbitration proceeding in accordance with Act 111. The sole purpose for that expedited arbitration proceeding will be for the arbitration panel to modify the plan plan design andor plan carrier in order to eliminate the exposure to the Cadillac Tax. The decision of the arbitration panel on this issue shall be issued within thirty (3) calendar days of the appointment of the neutral arbitrator.

ARTICLE XV - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURES 1.The following grievance procedure for consideration and adjustment of complaints will continue in effect for the term of this Agreement.

2.Purpose A.The purpose of this procedure is (1) to provide opportunity for discussion of any complaints or grievances and (2) to establish procedures for the processing and settlement of complaints or grievances as defined herein.

3.Definitions A.A Compliant in this procedure shall be interpreted to mean a request or complaint by andor on behalf of any employee covered by this Agreement.

B.A Grievance in this procedure shall be interpreted to mean any difference or dispute between the Township and any regular police officer with respect to discipline or to the interpretation application claim or breach or violation of provision(s) of this Agreement.

C.A Day in this procedure shall mean a calendar day and shall include any Saturday Sunday or Holiday. In the event that the final day of any of the deadlines hereunder falls on a Saturday Sunday or a Holiday the deadlines established hereunder shall automatically be extended to the first regular Township Administration business day following the Saturday Sunday or Holiday 4.Grievance Steps A.Step 1 - Any grievance shall first be submitted in writing to the Police Grievance Committee for review.

B.Step 2 - Any grievance by or on behalf of any police officer in the Bargaining Unit shall within fourteen (14) consecutive days of the occurrence giving rise thereto be filed with the Chief of Police on a form to be provided therefore by the Township. The Chief of Police or hisher designated representative shall respond in writing on the above said form within fourteen consecutive days of the filing of said grievance to the grievant and Association.

C.Step 3 - In the event that the grievant is not satisfied with the disposition of the grievance at the second step heshe shall within fourteen (14) consecutive days of that disposition appeal the grievance to the Township Manager. The Township Manager shall within fourteen (14) consecutive days of such appeal furnish a written response thereon to the grievant and the Association.

D.Step 4 - In the event that the grievant is not satisfied with the disposition at Step 3 heshe shall within fourteen (14) consecutive days thereafter appeal hisher grievance to the Township Board of Commissioners or its designated representative(s). The Board of Commissioners or its designated representative(s) shall within fourteen (14) consecutive days after its next regular meeting furnish its answer to the grievance in writing to the grievant and the Association.

E.Step 5 - In the event that the grievant and the Association are not satisfied with the disposition at Step 4 the Association shall within fourteen (14) consecutive calendar days of the Commissioners Step 4 answer ask for a list of arbitrators from the American Arbitration Association. Arbitration proceedings then shall be commenced with the selection of an arbitrator from the panel of arbitrators requested and received from that agency.

F.The Township and the Association shall alternate the option of which shall strike the first name from the list of arbitrators obtained from the American Arbitration Association. The remaining arbitrator shall be appointed and authorized to hear and resolve the unsettled grievance matter(s).

5.The Township and Association shall have a right to call witnesses at any of the grievance steps listed above if in the sole discretion of either it is believed that it cannot fairly process the grievance without so doing however unless either party exercises this right all grievances will be presented and decided solely on the grievance documents and evidence of record thereon.

6.The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding upon each of the parties hereto. The arbitrator shall have jurisdiction and authority to interpret and apply the provisions of this agreement only insofar as necessary to the determination of the particular involved dispute. The arbitrator shall have no jurisdiction or authority to alter add to or subtract from or otherwise change any of the provisions of this Agreement.

7.Fees and expenses of the American Arbitration Association and the arbitrator shall be paid equal by the Township and the Police OfficerWage and Policy Unit.

8.Since it is important that any grievance be processed as rapidly as possible the time limits stated above at each grievance level shall be considered the maximum time limits absent a written agreement to the contrary in each case by the parties. In the event that the Township fails to respond within such specified limits at any level such failure shall constitute a waiver of the right to answer that step and the grievance shall automatically proceed to the next step. In the event that any grievance is not filed andor appealed within such specified limits such failure shall constitute a withdrawal of the involved grievance by the Association.

9.Because either party may elect settlement of a grievance amicably on a compromised basis it is agreed that any voluntary withdrawal or grant of any grievance will not serve as a precedent and will not operate otherwise to the prejudice the position of either party in any future grievance on the same or other subject matter. No withdrawal or granted grievance may in itself be reinstated however under these provisions.

ARTICLE XVI - RECOGNITION 1.Pursuant to Act 111 of 1968 South Fayette Township recognizes the South Fayette Police Department Wage and Policy Unit as the exclusive representative for collective bargaining purposes for all members of the Police Department excluding the Chief of Police.

ARTICLE XVII - UNION SECURITY - AGENCY SHOP CLAUSE 1.All members of the Police Department who do not join the Bargaining Unit Representative (South Fayette Township Police Officers Wage and Policy Unit) shall as a condition of continued employment with the Township as a police officer pay to the employee representative each month a service charge as a contribution toward the administration of the collective bargaining between the parties which shall be equal to the regular monthly dues and assessments of the police which are required of all unit police officers.

2.The unit shall indemnify and save the township harmless against any and all claims demands suits or other forms of liability that shall arise out of or by reason of action taken or not taken for the purpose of complying with any of the provisions of this agency shop clause. The employer is required to deduct the current dues and assessments from compensation received by members of the Police Department. The dues and assessments from each members paycheck shall be forwarded to the account of the Treasurer of the bargaining unit representing the Police Department.

ARTICLE XVIII - PENSIONSOCIAL SECURITY OFFSETINTEGRATION 1.The following may shall apply to any officers eligible for social security benefits 2.A zero () offsetintegration factor of social security benefits is applied with relation to the benefits paid pursuant to the pension plan. There shall be no offset or reduction in pension benefits payable to the employee by virtue of social security benefits.

ARTICLE XIX -MISCELLANEOUS 1.The members of the Police Department shall be provided with a Master Schedule Plan. The Master Schedule Plan shall be rotated on a man-to-man basis subject to manpower availability and needs as determined by the Township Managers Designee. The Township Managers designee retains the right to maintain the schedule subject to the following A.The schedule will be posted thirty (3) days ahead of time and shall not be changed except as outlined in Section B. and Section C of this Article.

B.The Township Managers designee reserves the right to change the schedule upon fifteen (15) days written notice under the following circumstances (1)Officer EducationTraining (2)Officer termination andor resignation (3)Officer Workers CompensationHeart and Lung Injury (4)Foreseeable extended sick leave andor disability (4 or more consecutive Days) NoteEffects of schedule changes listed in (2) (3) and (4) above are not limited to the individual officer involved with the action. Item (1) is limited to scheduling changes for the individual officer only.

C.The Master Schedule may be changed at any time under the following circumstances (1)The Officer agrees to the change (2)The officers switch shifts amongst themselves within the guidelines of Article XIII of this Agreement (3)A natural disaster catastrophe riot time of war or any unanticipated event lasting longer than five days requiring greater than normal police coverage.

2.The following 8 hour shifts are established.  Investigators shifts may be adjusted at the discretion of the Police Chief.  7 AM - 3PM   8 AM - 4PM   11AM - 7AM In addition the following 12-hour shifts are established 6 a.m. to 6 p.m.  6 p.m. to 6 a. m.

A.Officers are limited to working not more than four (4) twelve-hour shifts in succession. Exceptions to this may be granted at the discretion of the Chief of Police Township Manager or their designee if extenuating circumstances are present.

B.After working eighteen (18) hours within a twenty-four (24) hour period officers must utilize compensatory time off to offset any hours worked in excess of eighteen (18) and to ensure that the officer has at least six (6) hours off before hisher next twelve hour (12) hour duty shift. Exceptions to this may be granted at the discretion 3.Additional manpower may be used at the discretion of the Chief.

4.Overtime is authorized by the Board of Commissioners at the Township Managers discretion to correct any schedule disparity.

5.

6.If one full-time member of the Police Department is the official elected FOP Delegate that individual police officer shall be permitted to take two (2) days of paid leave per year to attend FOP sanctioned business. These days will be solely at straight time and shall be subject to the same restrictions as outlined in Article VIII 8 of this Agreement. These days may not be carried from year to year and will not be paid if unused in the calendar year.

7.A master locker shall be provided for all police equipment with sign-out slips for equipment that belongs to the Township such as cameras recorders guns ammunition etc.

8.All overtime submitted by an officer in a pay period shall be paid within the current pay period.

9.Officers by majority vote will be able to select one caliber of firearm. All officers will be required to carry this firearm. Officer may not elect to switch calibers more than once per contract period.

1.Within 12 months of date of hire all officers shall reside within 3 air miles of the Township Municipal Building.

11.Within the limits of the Townships Budget the Chief shall make available a minimum of one (1) cell phone during a shift. This cell phone will be assigned to an officer by the Chief of Police andor his designee.

12.All officers shall have the choice of wearing protective vests on the outside of the uniform.

 WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto have set their hands and seals this  day of  221 ATTEST  TOWNSHIP OF SOUTH FAYETTE BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS                  TOWNSHIP OF SOUTH FAYETTE MANAGER     SOUTH FAYETTE TOWNSHIP POLICE WAGE AND POLICY UNIT        SOUTH FAYETTE TOWNSHIP POLICE DEPARTMENT                     Exhibit A Section 1 Definitions       DROP - The Deferred Retirement Option Plan created as an optional form of benefit under the existing South Fayette Township Police Pension Plan.

      DROP Account - A separate ledger account created to accumulate the DROP pension benefit for a DROP participant.

      Member - A full-time South Fayette police officer covered by the Plan.

      Participant - A member who is eligible for normal retirement and who has elected to participate in the DROP program.

      Plan - The South Fayette Township Pension Plan adopted pursuant to Act 6.

 Section 2 DROP Provisions (A)Eligibility. Effective January 1 29 members of the South Fayette Township Police Association bargaining unit that have not retired prior to the implementation of the DROP program may enter into the DROP on the first day of any month following the attainment of age 55 and the completion of 25 years or more years of credited service with South Fayette Township.

(B)Written Election. An eligible Member of the Plan electing to participate in the DROP program must complete and execute a DROP Election Form prepared by the South Fayette Township Manager andor the plan administrator which shall evidence the Members participation in the DROP program and document the Participants rights and obligations under the DROP. The form must be signed by the Member and the Chief Administrative Officer of the Plan and submitted to South Fayette Township within 3 days of the date on which the member wishes the DROP election to be effective. The DROP Election Form shall include an irrevocable notice to the Township of South Fayette by the Member that the Member shall terminate from employment with the South Fayette Township Police Department effective on a specific date three (3) years from the effective date of the DROP election. In addition all retirement documents required by the South Fayette Township Police Pension Plan Administrator must be filed and presented to the South Fayette Township Commissioners for approval of retirement and commencement of the monthly pension benefit. Once the retirement application has been approved by the Commissioners it shall become irrevocable.

      After a Member enters the DROP program contributions to the pension plan by the Participant and the Township will cease and the amount of the monthly benefits will be frozen except for any applicable Cost-of-Living Adjustment (COLA) increases awarded to all pension recipients.

      Members shall be advised to consult a Tax Advisor of their choice prior to considering the DROP program as there may be serious tax implications andor consequences to participating in the DROP program.

(C)Limitations on Pension Accrual. After the effective date of the DROP election the Participant shall no longer earn or accrue additional years of continuous service for pension purposes.

(D)Benefit Calculation. For all Plan purposes continuous service of a Member participating in the DROP program shall remain as it existed on the effective date of commencement of participation in the DROP program. Service thereafter shall not be recognized or used for the calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the South Fayette Township Police Pension Plan. The average monthly pay of the Member for pension calculation purposes shall remain as it existed on the effective date of commencement of participation in the DROP program. Earnings or increases in earnings thereafter shall not be recognized or used for the calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the Plan. The pension benefit payable to the Participants shall increase only as a result of Cost-of-Living Adjustments (COLA) effective on or after the date of the members participation in the DROP program.

(E)Payments to DROP Account. The monthly retirement benefits that would have been payable had the member elected to cease employment and receive a normal retirement benefit shall upon the Member commencing participation in the DROP program be credited on the first day of each month into a separate ledger account established by the Plan Administrator to track and accumulate the Participants monthly pension benefits. This account shall be designated the DROP Account. The DROP Account shall not contain a guaranteed interest rate. The account shall be managed by the Plan Administrator pursuant to the same fiduciary obligations and principles applicable to management of the municipal pension plans. The Plan Administrator may allow Participants to select certain types of investment from an available list of choices. Frequency of investment changes will be at the discretion of the Plan Administrator. All earnings credited to the DROP account will be included in the final cash settlement.

(F)Early Termination. A Participant may withdraw from the DROP program at any time and effectuate a complete retirement from service. No penalty shall be imposed for early termination of DROP participation. However the Participant shall not be permitted to make any withdrawals from the DROP Account until DROP participation has ended.

(G)Payout. Upon the termination date set forth in the DROP Election Form or on such date at the Participant withdraws or is terminated from the DROP program if earlier the normal retirement benefits payable to the Participant or the Participants beneficiary if applicable shall be paid directly to the Participant or beneficiary and shall no longer be credited to the DROP Account. Within thirty (3) days following the actual termination of a Participants employment with South Fayette Township the accumulated balance in the DROP Account shall be paid to the Participant in a single lump-sum payment. Such payment shall be made either in cash subject to any federal withholding as may be required or as a direct rollover to an Individual Retirement Account (IRA). If the Participant selects the rollover option he or she must also submit the appropriate paperwork from the IRA custodian within twenty (2) days following termination.

(H)Death. If a Participant dies before the DROP Account balance is paid the Participants beneficiary under Act 6 shall have the same rights as the Participant to withdraw the DROP Account balance. The monthly benefit credited to the Participants DROP Account during the month of the Participants death shall be the final monthly benefit for DROP participation.

(I)Killed-In-Service Survivor Benefit. If a Participant is killed in service the Participants beneficiaries under Act 6 shall be entitled to apply for and receive a recalculation for payment of survivor benefits at 1 of the Participants salary as fixed at the date of retirement.

(J)Amendment. Any amendments to the DROP Ordinance shall be consistent with the provisions covering deferred retirement option plans set forth in any applicable bargaining agreement or state or federal law and shall be binding upon all future Participants and upon all Participants who have balances in their DROP Accounts.

Section 3 Effective Date. The Effective Date of the DROP program will be January 1 29.

Section 4 Severability. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be severable and if any of its provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional or illegal the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby. It is hereby expressly declared as the intent of the South Fayette Township that this Ordinance has been adopted as if such unconstitutional or illegal provision or provisions had not been included herein.

Section 5 Pending Legislation. In the event of the passage of legislation governing DROPs in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania this Ordinance shall be amended to comply with any new legal requirements set forth in such legislation. The application of any amendments to police officers actively employed as of the effective date of any such legislation shall be governed by and consistent with constitutional principles applicable to the pension and retirement benefits.

      DocNo797959.1 1    DocNo797959.1   
