Collective Bargaining Agreement By and Between  Teamsters Local Union No. 25 Representing  Pleasant Hills Police Department And  The Borough of Pleasant Hills January 1 221 through December 31 225  Table of Contents Article No. 1  Previous Awards Agreements and Past Practices  1  Article No. 2  Term of Agreement  1  Article No. 3  Wages  2  Article No. 4  Work Schedules  2  Article No. 5  Holidays  3  Article No. 6  Overtime  3  Article No. 7  Officer in Charge  4  Article No. 8  Longevity  4  Article No. 9  Mileage Rate  4  Article No. 1  Meal Money  5  Article No. 11  Uniform and Cleaning Maintenance Allowance  5  Article No. 12  Vacations  5  Article No. 13  Personal Days  6  Article No. 14  Bereavement  6  Article No. 15  Sick Leave  7  Article No. 16  Medical Insurance Coverage  7  Article No. 17  Disability Benefits  8  Article No. 18  Life Insurance Accidental Death and Dismemberment  9  Article No. 19  Pension Contributions  1  Article No. 2  Pension Board  1  Article No. 21  Pension Benefits  1  Article No. 22  Grievance Procedure  12  Article No. 23  Residency  13  Article No. 24  Maintenance of Membership  13  Article No. 25  Officer Rights  13  Article No. 26  Canine Provisions  13  Article No. 27  Severability  14  AGREEMENT  This Agreement by and between the BOROUGH OF PLEASANT HILLS a municipal corporation located in Allegheny County Pennsylvania hereinafter referred to as Borough AND  TEAMSTERS LOCAL 25 of the Borough of Pleasant Hills Allegheny County Pennsylvania hereinafter referred to as Police.

 WITNESSETH WHEREAS the various Acts of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania provide for the negotiation and arbitration of wages conditions of employment benefits and other matters pertaining to working conditions of the members of its Police Force and WHEREAS the members of the Pleasant Hills Police Department have entered into discussions with the Pleasant Hills Borough Council concerning salary benefits and working conditions and WHEREAS the parties hereto desire to reduce their understandings and agreements to a written document.

NOW THEREFORE the parties to this Agreement intending to be legally bound agree as follows  1.

 PREVIOUS AW ARDS AGREEMENTS AND PAST PRACTICES  All prior interest arbitration awards and written collective bargaining agreements have been integrated into this agreement. This clause shall not be construed to prevent the Borough from managing the operations of the Police Department in a manner not inconsistent with the provisions of this Agreement.

2.

 TERM OF AGREEMENT  The term of this Agreement shall be five (5) years from 121 a.m. January 1 221 until 12 midnight December 31 225.

 1  WAGES  3.

 The wages during the term of this Agreement shall be as follows Service Completed with the Borough  (3.)  (2.75)  (3.)  (2.75)  (3.)  221  222  223  224  225  Lieutenant  $17436.21  $1139.71  $11372.43  $116829.24  $12334.12  Sergeant  $14573.89  $17449.67  $11673.16  $113716.67  $117128.17  Patrolman A  5 years  $99594.18  $12333.2  $1543.1  $1831.59  $11155.64  PatrolmanB (9 of A)  4 years 6 months  $89634.76  $9299.72  $94862.71  $97471.43  $1395.58  Patrolman C (85 of A)  3 years 9 months  $84655.5  $86983.7  $89592.56  $9256.35  $94818.5  Patrolman C-2 (8 of A)  3 years  $79675.35  $81866.42  $84322.41  $86641.27  $8924.51  Patrolman D-1 (75 of A)  2 years 3 months  $74695.64  $76749.77  $7952.26  $81226. 19  $83662.98  Patrolman D-2 (7 of A)  1 year 6 months  $69715.93  $71633.11  $73782.11  $75811. 11  $7885.45  Patrolman E-1 (65 of A)  9 months  $64736.22  $66516.46  $68511.96  $7396.3  $7257.92  Patrolman E-2 (6 of A)  Less than 9 months  $59756.51  $61399.81  $63241.81  $6498. 95  $6693.39  Sergeant rate to be set at 5 above Patrolman grade A.

The hourly rate each year shall be determined by dividing the annual salary by 28.

Effective January 1 217 officers will be paid every two weeks.

 4.

 WORK SCHEDULES  The parties shall continue to follow the current practice regarding work schedules for the duration of this collective bargaining agreement.

2  5.

 HOLIDAYS  Each Officer shall receive thirteen (13) paid holidays per year as follows 11 New Years Day  Presidents Day 317 St. Patricks Day  Good Friday  Easter   Memorial Day 614 Flag Day 74 Fourth of July 814 V.J. Day  Labor Day   Columbus Day  Thanksgiving Day 1225  Christmas  ( Actual dates for these holidays change each year.) Any Police Officer who works on any of the above-designated holidays will be compensated at the rate of two and one-half (2-12) times his daily rate of pay. Holiday pay will be paid to any officer whose eight (8) hour tour of duty ends on a holiday.

6.

 OVERTIME  A. The regular rate of pay as the term is used in this paragraph shall mean the hourly rate which the Police Officer would have received for the work if it had been performed during non-overtime hours including longevity divided by 28.

B. For overtime calculation purposes the workweek shall consist of seven (7) consecutive calendar days beginning at 7 am. on Sunday.

C. Overtime at the rate of one and one-half times the hourly rate of pay shall be paid for all hours worked in excess of forty (4) hours in a workweek.

D. Hours compensated for at overtime rates shall not be counted further for any purpose in determining overtime liability under the same or any other provisions of this Agreement.

E. Time worked shall be included in the determination of hours worked. Time worked shall include paid time off such as sick leave or vacation leave and all court time magistrate time time in attendance at training meetings required by the Borough and unworked holidays.

F. Police Officers called back to work for any purpose including court or magistrate appearances after completing their normal eight (8) hour workday within any twenty-four (24) hour period or after completing forty (4) straight time hours within one week shall be guaranteed a minimum of three (3) hours work at the applicable rate of pay. (One (1)hour minimum at the beginning of a scheduled shift).

1.

 When a court appearance attendance at a magistrates hearing or training does not occur during the course of a duty assignment it shall be considered a call-out. In the event of a court appearance a Police Officer shall receive the three (3) hour guarantee or the actual time spent including travel time whichever is greater.

3  2. If the above-cited hours in Subsection 1 would be in excess of the Police Officers scheduled eight (8) hours in one day or forty (4) hours in one week the officer shall be paid at the overtime rate.

3. The Borough shall not be required to pay a Police Officer for an appearance in court involving a civil case unless he is subpoenaed by the Borough as a witness or is a defendant as a result of his having acted within the scope of his employment.

4. Overtime opportunities which are known to the Borough in advance and paid details shall be distributed as equally as possible among the unit Police Officers. The Borough shall normally assign such overtime opportunities and paid details from a list of those Police Officers who have stated an interest in such assignments with the assignments being offered in seniority order. When an Officer declines an assignment the time refused shall be credited to the Officers accumulation. This provision shall not apply to selection of personnel for emergencies or unplanned overtime for which an Officer is held over or called out early. Nothing in this provision shall be construed to give an Officer the right to refuse emergency overtime or a junior Officer the right to refuse an overtime assignment.

7.

 OFFICER IN CHARGE COMPENSATION  A Patrolman who is placed in charge of a shift when neither a Lieutenant a Sergeant nor the Chief is assigned to the shift shall be compensated at the Sergeants rate. Assignment on a shift of an aforementioned supervisor will not negate this provision if such supervisor is on special assignment light duty at the desk or other non-supervisory assignment for the shift.

8.

 LONGEVITY  Longevity shall be 2 of the Officers base rate after five (5) years of service 3 of the Officers base rate after ten (1) years of service 4 of the Officers base rate after fifteen (15) years of service and 5 of the Officers base rate after twenty (2) years of service.

Longevity payments will be made at the end of the month in which the Officers anniversary date falls. The Borough of Pleasant Hills agrees that it will pay any longevity payment by a separate check rather than including such longevity pay in the Police Officers regular paycheck.

9.

 MILEAGE RATE  Police Officers attending schools or traveling on official Police business when not provided transportation are authorized to use private transportation and they shall receive mileage at the Internal Revenue Service reimbursement rate for each mile from the Borough Building in the Borough of Pleasant Hills to their destination and return.

 4  1.

 MEAL MONEY  Police Officers attending schools or traveling on official Police business outside the Borough of Pleasant Hills except for court appearances shall receive reimbursement of one-half of the cost of food.

11.

 UNIFORM AND CLEANING MAINTENANCE ALLOWANCE  Each Police Officer is granted an annual uniform allowance of Three Hundred and seventy-five and 1 Dollars ($375.) effective January 1 21 and shall be increased to Four Hundred 1 Dollars ($4.) per year effective January 1 212. Any part of this allowance not used in one year may be accumulated to following years.

The Borough further grants a cleaning allowance to each Police Officer in the amount of Three Hundred and 1 Dollars ($3.) per year.

 In addition the Borough shall provide a bulletproof vest to each employee requesting a vest. An employee requesting a vest shall wear the vest while on his duty shift with the exception of court appearances or when excused by the Chief of Police for a special detail or purpose. The Borough shall pay the cost of providing the bulletproof vest up to six hundred dollars ($6.). Any cost in excess of six hundred dollars ($6.) shall be paid by the employee. The employee may utilize hisher uniform allowance for any cost exceeding six hundred dollars ($6.).

12.

 VACATIONS  A. The following Vacation Schedule shall be in effect for all police officers  After After After After  completion completion completion completion  of 1 year of service  1 working days of 5 years of service  15 working days of 1 years of service  2 working days of 15 years of service  25 working days  B. Any Officer with three (3) weeks vacation or more after all full week vacations have been picked may pick no more than one (1)week of his vacation days on a daily basis provided that it does not conflict with the schedule. Requests must be made no less than two (2) weeks in advance of the week in which the vacation day is to occur.

C. Vacation selection shall be governed by the following provisions Three Officers (whether Patrolman Sergeant or Lieutenant) may be on vacation at one time.

Only two of the three Officers may be on vacation at the same time and on the same shift. At no time can three Officers be on vacation at the same time AND on the same shift. Only one Sergeant or Lieutenant may be on vacation at any given time.

1st Pick -- Two weeks by seniority. Must be picked by Officer on dates indicated by his name.

If Officer does not pick by date indicated next senior Officr may make his choice.

 5  2nd Pick -- Rest of solid weeks vacation allowed by seniority must be picked by Officer on dates indicated by his name. If Officer does not pick by date indicated next senior Officer may make his choice.3rd Pick -- Any split weeks. Officer may choose single days by placing dates on vacation schedule on days desired. If Officer does not pick vacation on dates indicated for 3rd pick next senior Officer chooses.Any Officer who wishes any type of vacation days during January February March or April should arrange it with the scheduling Officer prior to January 31. A choice of vacation during this period will not affect the Officers pick of first two weeks.

All vacation time is picked by seniority therefore any Officer desiring specific vacation time that may conflict with seniority should arrange it with the scheduling Officer.

13.

 PERSONAL DAYS  Each Officer will be entitled to two (2) days per year at full pay which shall be called personal days.

Effective January 1 214 each officer shall be entitled to three (3) personal days per year.

An Officer has the right to take a personal day merely by notifying the Officer-in-charge no later than sixteen (16) hours prior to the commencement of such personal day. The notice need not set forth any reason whatsoever for such personal day. Should any Officer confront a personal emergency which occurs within sixteen (16) hours of any shift he is scheduled to work he may still elect to take one ( 1) of his personal days provided that he informs the Officer-in-charge of the particular emergency which he confronts. In that situation the Officer-in-charge should normally grant the request but may refuse to grant the request if in his reasonable judgment a critical situation will require the services of such officer. The Officer-in-charge may not refuse the request because of mere scheduling difficulties economic considerations or similar reasons. At no time however may more than one man per shift be granted a personal day.

14.

 BEREAVEMENT BENEFITS  A. Each Police Officer shall receive five (5) days off with pay in the event of the death of that Officers spouse child mother father guardian (provided a guardian has been so designated to the Borough secretary) or the death of the Police Officers spouses mother or father.

Each Police Officer shall receive two (2) days off with pay in the event of the death of that Officers brother or sister.

Each Police Officer shall receive one (1) day off with pay in the event of the death of that Officers grandparent spouses grandparent or the spouses brother or sister.

B. The Officer may augment the number of days off (i.e. with pay in any of the three above classes) by adding any number of extra days per occurrence provided that such addition shall reduce the members holiday or vacation allowances at the members option by one day for every day added to the regular number of days off provided further that there shall be sufficient holiday or vacation days to be reduced for this purpose. If there are no holiday or vacation days available for reduction for a particular occurrence then the member shall not be entitled to augment the number of days 6  off within any class occurrence until such time as additional holiday or vacation days become available.

15.

 SICKLEAVE  A. Each Police Officer shall be entitled to fourteen (14) days per calendar year sick leave.

Effective January 1 214 one (1) sick day will be converted to a personal day entitling each officer to thirteen (13) sick days per calendar year beginning January 1 214. Any unused sick leave per year may be accumulated to a maximum of ninety (9) days. Upon retirement the Employer shall buy back any unused sick days at fifty percent (5) of the employees regular rate of pay.

 B. During the first year of employment a Police Officer shall be entitled to seven (7) days sick leave which may be used at any time during that year. At the end of said year the Police Officer shall be entitled to the additional seven (7) days sick leave.

C. Any Police Officer who is off duty on paid or unpaid leave due to sickness or accident for five (5) or less days in a calendar year may sell back any unused sick leave for that year not to exceed nine (9) sick days and receive $5. for each sick day instead of adding the days to the Officers sick leave accumulation.

16.

 MEDICAL INSURANCE COVERAGE  The Borough shall provide to each Police Officer and eligible members of his immediate family the following A. Police Officers shall continue to be eligible for the PPO Blue Option 1 plan. Effective June 1 213 employees shall be responsible for ten percent (1) of the premium cost for health insurance coverage eye care and dental. In the event the total premium for these coverages increases at a rate of ten percent (1) or more or in the event the employee contribution exceeds one percent (1 ) of pay at the patrol officers five (5) year rate either party may request that the contract be reopened for purposes of negotiation a change in the carriers plans plan designs or other cost containment effort. A request to reopen must be made within ten ( 1) days of receipt of notice of an applicable rate increase and if the parties fail to resolve any dispute within thirty (3) days of that notice then the parties may proceed to arbitration before this same panel solely on the issue(s) subject to the reopener set forth above.

 B. The Borough shall continue the group dental program currently in effect subject to the ten percent (1) employee contribution set forth above in Paragraph A.

The Borough shall continue to provide the eye care and optical services plan of insurance currently in effect subject to the ten percent (1) employee contribution set forth in Paragraph A. above.

 7  17. DISABILITY BENEFITS A. Occupational Disability I. Temporarv Occupational Disability A temporarily disabled Police Officer shall be paid in accordance with applicable law for the duration of his temporary occupational disability. The Borough shall be entitled to a credit of any Workers Compensation Benefit to which the injured Police Officer may be entitled up to the amount paid to the Officer by the Borough.

2. Total Permanent Occupational Disability A totally and permanently disabled Police Officer shall receive a monthly disability pension equal to fifty percent (5) of the officers base monthly salary at the time of the disability pursuant to the Borough of Pleasant Hills Pension Ordinance as amended.

The Borough shall be entitled to a credit against the monthly disability pension benefits herein provided for any workmens compensation benefits Social Security disability benefits third party liability benefits or any other statutory benefits to which the injured Police Officer may be entitled. The injured Police Officer agrees that he will take all necessary steps to obtain any benefits to which he may be entitled because of the disability which he received.

3. Partial Permanent Occupational Disability A permanently partially disabled Police Officer shall be entitled to receive one years base salary in return for rendering to the Pleasant Hills Police Department those services which he is physically able to perform taking into consideration the injury which he received. At the end of one year such permanently partially disabled Police Officer shall be retired from the Police Force and shall receive a lifetime disability pension computed by multiplying the disabled officers base salary at the time of his injury by his percent of disability.

B. Non-Occupational Disability 1. Basic Non-Occupational SicknessAccident and Disability Benefit.

Non-occupational disability is a non-work-related disability which is not covered by workmens compensation or the Heart and Lung Act.

For the first seven (7) calendar days off the job the source of income is a draw against the employees current sick leave allocation. Assuming that this is the first disability in a year an employees thirteen (13) days allowed sick leave would be reduced to 8 days at the end of the waiting period. Additional compensation would be paid directly by the Borough based on an employees Current Year Sick Leave Allocation status.

The following table defines an employees benefit entitlement as a function of his current year sick leave remaining after the one week waiting period  8  Number of Days Remaining 8Days 7Days 6Days 5Days 4Days 3Days 2Days 1 Days Days  Percentage of Salm 1  95  92  9  87  85  82  8  77   The sick leave accumulated over prior years would be reduced by one half (12) of one day for each day that the employee received a supplemental payment from the Borough. In this way an employee with a maximum ninety (9) days of previously accumulated sick leave could draw one hundred percent (1) of pay for a total of one hundred eighty (18) working days which is thirty-six (36) weeks.

2. Short Term Disability The short term non-occupational disability payment will commence on the 8th calendar day and provides sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 23) of gross pay for twenty-six (26) weeks offset by the primary benefits under Social Security. In the event the Social Security benefit exceeds sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 23) of an Officers gross pay the amount of the disability benefit in excess of sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 23) shall be paid to the Officer and shall not constitute an offset to his disability benefit.

3. Long-Term Disability The long-term disability program will commence on the 181st calendar day of disability and will continue to age 65 at sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 23) of gross pay offset by the primary Social Security benefits. In the event the Social Security benefit exceeds sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 23) of an Officers disability benefit the amount in excess of sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 23) shall be paid to the Officer and shall not constitute an offset to his disability benefit.

18.

 LIFE INSURANCE ACCIDENTAL DEATH AND DISMEMBERMENT  A. The Borough will provide a life insurance policy for each Police Officer in the amount of Fifty Thousand and 1 Dollars ($5.) with a provision in each policy for double indemnity in the event of accidental death.

 B. The Borough will provide at its sole cost accidental dismemberment benefits in the amount of Twenty Thousand and 1 Dollars ($2.) for double dismemberment (two limbs or eyes or any combination of the same) and will provide accidental dismemberment benefits of Ten Thousand and 1 Dollars ($1.) for a single dismemberment or loss of one eye.

 9  19.

 PENSION CONTRIBUTIONS  Police officers shall be required to contribute the maximum amount permitted by Act 6 in any year that contributions to the police pension plan are required. In setting the contribution rate no participant contributions will be required unless and until foreign casualty insurance funds (state aid) to be received yearly by the Borough by virtue of the existence of the police force of the Borough are insufficient to satisfy the yearly funding need of the police plan.

2.

 PENSION BOARD  There will always be at least one (I) member of the Police Force (or his designated alternative) exclusive of the Chief of Police on the Pension Board. The chairman of the Police Bargaining Unit shall receive a copy of any actuarial or financial statements presented to the Pension Board.

21.

 PENSION BENEFITS  Each Officer shall be entitled to such pension benefits in accordance with Act 6 and as provided under the pension plan ordinance of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as amended.

The following regulations shall benefit such members of the Police Force of the Borough of Pleasant Hills as shall receive honorable discharge therefrom by reason of age and service and prescribes certain benefits available to widows or children of deceased members of the Police Force of the Borough of Pleasant Hills under certain conditions.

A. Age and Service Requirements 1. A police officer who retires on or after 1191 shall be eligible for retirement ifhe shall have completed twenty-five (25) years of active service with the Borough of Pleasant Hills and shall have attained the age of fifty (5) years. Notwithstanding this age and service requirement if any Police Officer was hired prior to December 21 1965 he may retire under the age and service requirements set forth above or he may retire upon completion of twenty (2) years of service and having attained the age of sixty (6) years.

2. For any police officer who retires on or after January 1 1991 the police officer shall be entitled to buy back prior military service in accordance with applicable law.

B. Amount of Pension 1. Each Police Officer who shall qualify for normal retirement benefits shall upon retirement receive a retirement pension equal to one-half (12) of his average base monthly salary including longevity payments during the last thirty-six (36) months of his employment.

Each employee who retires on or after January 1 1991 shall have his pension determined on the basis of his average gross monthly compensation which is in conformance with the decision of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania in Palyok v. Borough of West Mifflin 586 A.2d 366 (Pa. 1991.) 2. Upon retirement the retired police officer will receive a sum of twenty dollars ($2.) per month for each full year that such police officer worked beyond his normal retirement.

 The payment shall never exceed One Hundred ($1.) Dollars per month and shall terminate as soon as the retired police officer becomes eligible for Medicare payments.

Following completion of a cost study as required by Act 25 of 1984 and effective for any employee retiree on or after January 1 28 the retired police officer will receive a sum of One Hundred ($1.) Dollars per month for each full year that such police officer worked beyond his normal retirement. The payment shall never exceed One Hundred ($1.) Dollars per month and shall terminate as soon as the retired police officer becomes eligible for Medicare payments.

3. Each police officer who is employed by the Borough of Pleasant Hills as of January 1 1993 and who retires after that date with a full pension may at the officers discretion remain a member of the medical insurance group of the Borough of Pleasant Hills for medical insurance purposes. This section is intended to apply only to police officers employed by the Borough of Pleasant Hills as police officers as of January 1 1993 and their spouses and dependent children and does not extend to officers hired by the Borough of Pleasant Hills after that date.

The surviving spouse andor dependent children of a police officer to whom this section applies will be eligible to remain as a member or members of the medical insurance group of the Borough of Pleasant Hills if the deceased police officer retired and chose the benefits outlined in Section 16 of this Agreement. Payment for medical insurance after the retirement of the police officer shall be the sole responsibility of the police officer or his surviving spouse or surviving children if applicable and not of the Borough of Pleasant Hills except that if a police officer receives a Disability Pension then the Borough will be solely responsible for payment of medical insurance.

4. The term full pension as referenced in this Agreement shall be defined as follows The amount of money received by a retired police officer who retires solely because he has attained at least the minimum age necessary for normal retirement and the minimum number of years of service necessary for normal retirement including any military time buy-back where applicable.

C. Widow and Childrens Benefits The Borough of Pleasant Hills agrees that it will provide survivor benefits in accordance with Act 3 and pursuant to the Pleasant Hills Borough Pension Plan Ordinance as amended.

Pursuant to the provisions Act 51 of 29 the Killed in Service Benefit has been eliminated from the Pension Ordinance and provided by statute.

D. In the event that any Police Officer of the Borough of Pleasant Hills should terminate his employment with the Borough of Pleasant Hills for any reason he shall be entitled to a refund of all contributions which he has made to the Pleasant Hills Police Pension Fund plus simple interest on such contributions at the rate of 6.

E. Police Officers shall be eligible to participate in the deferred compensation program established by the Borough. The Borough shall have no obligation to contribute to this plan.

 11  F. F. The Pension Plan shall be revised to incorporate a Deferred Retirement Option Provision (DROP) consistent with the terms and conditions of Act 44 of 29 with no cost to the Borough.

 22.

 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE  A Grievance is hereby defined as any controversy complaint misunderstanding or dispute over any provision contained in the Collective Bargaining Agreement.

All disputes between the Employer and the Bargaining Unit or between the Employer and any of its Employees relating to this Agreement its meaning or application shall be settled in accordance with the following grievance procedure All grievances must be initiated within fifteen (15) working days of the alleged occurrence or within fifteen (15) working days from the time it could reasonably be expected that the grievant would have knowledge of the alleged occurrence.

Step One The grievant must reduce his grievance to writing to the Mayor of the Borough and the Teamsters Union. The shall meet within five (5) working days after the presentation in an attempt to settle the dispute. A written answer must be within three (3) working days after such meeting.

 and give or send a copy of the same Mayor and the Police representative of the Employees written grievance given by the Mayor or his appointee  Step Two If the grievance is not settled in Step One the grievance shall be presented in writing to the President of the Borough Council through the Secretary of the Borough. Borough Council or its designee shall schedule a meeting with the Unions designee to discuss the grievance and will answer the grievance in writing within five (5) working days of the date of that meeting.

Step Three In the event no agreement is reached at Step Two either the Teamsters Union or the Employer may upon written request appeal the grievance to arbitration within five (5) working days after receipt of the Step Two answer. An impartial arbitrator will be selected within five (5) working days after the request for arbitration is made by the parties. The Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service shall be used as a source for a list of arbitrators who are members of the National Academy of Arbitrators and who reside in Western Pennsylvania in the event a grievance proceeds to arbitration. If the parties are unable to mutually agree upon an impartial arbitrator the parties shall select the impartial arbitrator from a list of three (3) arbitrators by each party alternately removing one name from the list until one name remains. The Employer shall strike the first name. It is agreed that the arbitrator shall be bound by the terms ofthis Agreement and shall have no authority to modify its terms and conditions.

The expenses of the impartial arbitrator selected if any shall be borne equally by the Employer and the Teamsters Union. The Police Bargaining Unit and the Borough will each incur its own expenses including attorneys and witness fees.

Time limits established shall be strictly construed and may be extended only upon written agreement of the parties. A grievance not filed within fifteen (15) working days of its occurrence or knowledge 12  D. The canine shall remain property of Pleasant Hills Borough during its entire period of service.

The Borough shall pay all expenses for food and veterinary care of the canine and basic kennel fees while the officer is on vacation if any. The canine officer must submit to Pleasant Hills Borough appropriate receipts for these expenses.

E. The canine officer shall have the assignment of housing feeding cleaning handling maintaining and being responsible for the police dog. The canine officer shall not use the police dog to perform any services or work for any other police department other governmental agency employer or any other person whatsoever except with the consent of the Borough of Pleasant Hills.

 F. Pleasant Hills Borough has the right to adopt implement revise or rescind a Canine Policy at anytime.

G. The Parties agree and acknowledge that Pleasant Hills Borough shall have the right to  determine and designate the schedule of the canine officer and the canine to provide the most efficient and effective use of the canines services.

H. The Parties agree and acknowledge that in a normal workweek the canine officer shall work 4 hours per week but that he shall be compensated for working 43.5 hours per week. The compensation for the additional 3.5 hours per week shall be paid at the overtime rate and shall be in consideration for the additional duties of housing feeding cleaning handling maintaining and being responsible for the canine.

I.

 The Parties agree that the exact amount oftime associated with the duties of housing feeding cleaning handling maintaining and being responsible for the canine cannot be calculated accurately each pay period and that the schedule set forth in Paragraph H of this Section is reasonable and adequate compensation for those duties and takes into account all local state and federal laws and regulations regarding employee compensation and overtime compensation. The canine officer is prohibited from working in excess of the 3.5 overtime hours per week set forth in Paragraph H of this Section for the housing cleaning handling maintaining and being responsible for the canine without seeking prior approval from Pleasant Hills Borough.

 J. The Parties further agrees that the schedule set forth in Paragraph Hof this Section complies with all provisions of the Collective Bargaining Agreement.

 2 7. SEVERABILITY Should any portion of this Agreement be held unlawful and unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction such decision of the court shall apply only to the specific portion thereof directly specified in the decision. The remainder of the Agreement shall remain in full force and effect.

This Agreement sets forth all covenants stipulations and provisions agreed upon by the parties hereto and no agent or representative of either party has authority to make and none of the parties shall be bound by or liable for any statement representation promise inducement or agreement 14  not set forth herein. This Agreement spells out the total understanding in its entirety between the parties including wages salaries pensions and all fringe benefits and there shall be no other additions or changes during the term of the Collective Bargaining Agreement.

Teamsters Local Union No. 25  Pleasant Hills Borough  Date  15  
