POLICE EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT        THIS AGREEMENT is entered into on the  day of  219 by and between the BOROUGH OF SHARPSBURG political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with its principal offices located at 1611 Main Street Pittsburgh PA 15215 hereinafter referred to as Borough                               AND The POLICE DEPARTMENT OF THE BOROUGH OF SHARPSBURG hereinafter referred to as the Police.

      ARTICLE I - EFFECTIVE DATE       The contract shall be effective January 1 22 and shall terminate on the 31st day of December 222.

      ARTICLE II - DEFINITIONS       (A)  Police - the term police as used in this award shall include all persons employed as full-time police officers in the Borough of Sharpsburg.

      (B)  Borough - shall mean the Borough of Sharpsburg.

      ARTICLE III - WORK HOURS AND SHIFT ASSIGNMENTS       (A)  All police officers shall work eight (8) consecutive hours within a twenty-four (24) hour period which shall constitute one (1) workday and forty (4) hours per week as defined herein.  Said forty (4) hours shall consist of five (5) eight (8) hour workdays.  All police officers shall receive pay at the rate of time and one-half (1-12) the hourly rate for all time worked over eight (8) hours in any calendar day and one and one-half (112) the hourly rate for any day over five (5) consecutive days notwithstanding the scheduled shift within the pay period.  All full-time police officers hired on and after October 1 2 shall receive two (2) consecutive calendar days off within said work week.

      The work week is defined as beginning with the first shift on Sunday (12 A.M.) and ending with the last shift on Saturday (12 A.M.).

      Shift assignments shall not be made for disciplinary purposes.

      The work schedule shall be posted at least ninety (9) days in advance.

      Each police officer shall have at least sixteen (16) hours rest between shifts.

      (B)  In the event that any police officer is required to report to work at a time different than his scheduled shift assignment the police officer shall be notified at least four (4) hours prior to the starting time of his new shift assignment.  In the event of an emergency or replacement for a fellow officer who has reported off the notification shall be given to the police officer within a reasonable time after the Borough has been notified of the same.

      (C)  Schedule changes shall be made by the Chief of Police without any obligation to schedule any member of the police in accordance with seniority.

ARTICLE IV - SALARY       For any full-time police officer with the rank of patrolman hired after January 1 216 the following annual salary shall be paid to said police officer effective January 1 217 1st year of service75 of Top Patrolman Salary 2nd year of service85 of Top Patrolman Salary       3rd year of service1 of Top Patrolman Salary                     For any police officer with the rank of patrolman hired after January 1 1997 who has successfully completed two (2) years of continuous service from the officers date of hire with the Sharpsburg Police Department the following annual salary shall be paid effective on the following dates       January 1 22$6843.36        January 1 221$784.66  January 1 222$72187.2  These wages reflect a 3 increase in 22 221 and 222.

 Any police officer with the rank of Sergeant and Captain shall be paid the following annual salary effective on the following dates Sergeant wages to be 3 higher that patrolman wages Captain wages to be 5 higher than patrolman wages       The officer-in-charge (O.I.C.) with the rank of patrolman only shall receive a shift differential increase of three dollars and fifty cents ($ 3.5) per shift.

Any police officer working an outside detail defined as duties for which the Borough is reimbursed by an outside agency shall be paid at the highest overtime rate defined as the Chief of Polices overtime rate for such details.

ARTICLE V - COMPENSATION FOR COURT TIME In the event that any police officer is required to appear in court pursuant to his duties and not during his duty time the police officer shall be paid at their rate of pay based upon the amount of hours actually incurred relating to his appearance in court in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act as amended including overtime if applicable.  In addition the police officer shall retain any witness fees payable to said police officer.  Compensation shall be paid pursuant to the terms of this paragraph when any police officer serves a subpoena involving the Shaler Community Network Mutual Aid Pact.

ARTICLE VI - LONGEVITY PAY (A)  Upon completion of three (3) consecutive years of service each police officer shall receive longevity pay up to and including twenty-five (25) years of service.

(B)  This benefit was made available with the contract year commencing January 1 1972 first payments due commencing contract year January 1 1975.

(C)  Commencing with the contract year of January 1 217 the rate shall be One Hundred Fifty Dollars ($15.) per year up to a maximum of 25 years and payable on or about June 1 of each year.

ARTICLE VII - BEREAVEMENT PAY (A)  All police officers shall be entitled to a leave of absence five (5) days at his regular rate if there is a death in the immediate family which immediate family is defined as spouse mother father brother sister or child.

(B)  All police officers shall be entitled to a leave of absence of three (3) days at his regular rate for the death of the officers grandparents or for the death in the immediate family of his wife which immediate family is defined as mother father sister brother or child.

(C) All police officers shall be entitled to a leave of absence of one (1) day at his regular rate for the death of anyone else in his or his wifes family up to and including the death of a first cousin.

(D)  In no event shall police officers be paid any bereavement pay as so computed that falls during vacation holiday or any time off.

ARTICLE VIII - SICK LEAVE (A)  Each full-time police officer shall receive twelve (12) days sick leave per year.  Full-time officers may accumulate unused sick leave up to one hundred twenty (12) days.  The Borough shall buy back from police officers hire before January 1 217 any accumulated and unused sick time in excess of one hundred twenty (12) days at a rate of fifty percent (5) of said officers full-time regular hourly wage in effect for that calendar year.  The Borough shall pay to police officers hired before January 1 217 upon retirement or permanent disability for all unused sick leave a rate of fifty percent (5) of said officers full-time regular hourly wage in effect for that calendar year calculated through the date of such officers retirement or permanent disability date in the event such officer retires from employment or is determined to be permanently disabled.  Any accumulated unused sick leave shall be payable as aforesaid upon said officers retirement or permanent disability date.  NOTE All future police officer hires after January 1 217 will not be eligible for this buy back benefit.  All police officers hired prior to January 1 217 are grandfathered under the prior agreement at 5 buy-back and is non-negotiable without the consent of all active grandfathered officers.

(B)  If a police officer is absent for three (3) consecutive days or longer due to illness he shall be required to furnish a medical certification from a medical doctor.

ARTICLE IX - HOLIDAYS (A)  Police officers shall be paid for the following holidays 1.   New Years Day 6.  Labor Day11. Birthday 2.  Presidents Day 7.  Veterans Day12. Personal Day 3.  Good Friday 8.  Thanksgiving Day 4.  Memorial Day 9.  Day after Thanksgiving 5.  Independence Day1.  Christmas Day    (B)  If a police officer is scheduled to work on a holiday listed in subparagraph (A) of this Article he shall receive the holiday pay and shall be paid one and one-half (1 12) the hourly rate for the shift worked on the holiday.

The police officer shall have the option of receiving compensation time off in lieu of holiday pay so long as there is no additional compensation to the Borough.  Any police officer who works on a holiday listed in subparagraph (A) of this Article shall not receive any additional compensation as a result of the sixteen (16) hour rule and waives the sixteen (16) hour rule for the holiday or holidays worked.

ARTICLE X - VACATIONS Each police officer shall be entitled to a vacation based on the following schedule Employment One (1) year through three (3) yearsTwo (2) Weeks Four (4) years through nine (9) yearsThree (3) Weeks Ten (1) years through nineteen (19) yearsFour (4) Weeks Twenty (2) years and thereafterFive (5) Weeks  (B)  In the event a conflict arises in scheduling of vacations said conflict shall be resolved by the use of seniority in scheduling the vacations.

ARTICLE XI - SCHOOLING (A)  Police officers are permitted to attend Firearms School once a year on Borough time.

(B)  Attendance at any other schools or academics shall be at the discretion of the Borough.

(C)  If the Borough requires attendance at a police school the Borough shall pay all expenses incurred as a result of attendance.

ARTICLE XII - UNIFORM AND EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE In each year of this Agreement the uniform and equipment allowance shall be eight hundred  ($ 8.) dollars for each police officer available January 1st through December 31st of each calendar year.  The monies will be provided through the borough manager by a pre-paid bank card.  Receipts are required for all purchases.

ARTICLE XIII - HOSPITALIZATION Beginning in 217 the Borough shall provide and pay the premiums for group medical benefits for each full-time police officer and his dependents as applicable including major medical coveragehospitalization vision coverage and dental coverage.  The major medical planhospitalization plan for 217 shall be either Highmark PPO Blue or UPMC PPO the vision plan for 217 shall be Vision Benefits of America and the dental plan for 217 shall be United Concordia Flex Dental Care Protection Plan known as HI-Option.

The Borough shall have the right to make any changes to medical benefits due to or required by any change in federal or state governmental requirements.  Any such changes shall be discussed with the police prior to implementation.  The Borough shall also have the right to change carriers on an annual basis provided that the new carrier provides comparable coverage and benefits. Comparable coverage does not mean exactly the same and any such changes must be discussed prior to implementation.  The question of equivalency may be placed before a neutral arbitrator on an expedited basis.      Effective January 1 217 in the event of any increase from the 216 healthcare rates under this article any officer participating in said health coverage shall pay ten percent (1) of said increase from the 216 premium but not to exceed one percent (1) of the officers annual salary.  The officers healthcare contributions shall be deducted in equal amounts from the officers paychecks.Said 216 premiums are as follows single $68.81 ParentChild(ren) $1361.62 two person $1872.22 and family $242.43.

ARTICLE XIV - FALSE ARREST INSURANCE (A)  The Borough shall provide to all members of the Police Department a Police Professional Liability Insurance Policy.

ARTICLE XV - LIFE INSURANCE (A)  All life insurance andor death benefits are provided for in the Police Pension Program.

ARTICLE XVI - RETIREMENT AND PENSION (A)  All retirement provisions and pension benefits are set forth in detail in the Code of Ordinances for the Borough of Sharpsburg Chapter 1 Part 4 (formerly Ordinance 349 as amended).         (B)  Chapter 1 Part 4 of the Codification is attached hereto and made part hereof.

(C)  A police officer (which includes the Chief) shall be elected from the police to serve as a member of the Police Pension Committee.

(D)  Any time spent in the United States uniformed armed services shall not be included as time worked for pension credit except as required by State andor Federal law or the Borough  of Sharpsburg Police Pension Plan as amended.

(E)  The Pension Plan shall be amended to provide for retirement after twenty-five (25) years of service and fifty years of age subject to meeting all requirements of Pennsylvania law.

ARTICLE XVII - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE (A)  For the purpose of this Contract the term Grievance means any difference or dispute between the Borough and any regular police officer with respect to the interpretation application claim or breach or violation of any of the provisions of this Contract.

(B)  Should a grievance arise between the Borough and the police officers there shall be no suspension of work on account of such grievance but the grievance shall be settled in accordance with the grievance procedure hereinafter set forth.

      (C)  The regular police officers shall designate to the Borough Manager a Grievance Committee composed of not more than three (3) regular police officers one of whom shall be designated as Chairman       (D)  Any regular police officer having grievance shall first discuss the grievance with his superior in the chain of command.  If after such discussion satisfaction is not received he may file his grievance in writing on a form agreed upon by the parties to this Agreement.  If the committee finds merit in the grievance it shall follow that grievance to the next step.        The following grievance steps shall be followed 1.The written grievance shall be given to the Borough Manager within ten (1) days from the occurrence of the grievance and the same shall be considered in a meeting within seven (7) days thereafter by an authorized representative of Council the Mayor Chairman of the Grievance Committee and the aggrieved police officer.  Within seven (7) days thereafter a decision shall be made by an authorized representative of Council and the Mayor.

2. If the matter is not settled to the satisfaction of the aggrieved police officer he shall advise the Grievance Committee.  The Grievance  Committee and the aggrieved police officer may then jointly be entitled to arbitration in the manner set forth in the act of June 24 1968.   The expenses and salary incident to the services of a third party arbitrator shall be shared 5-5 by the Borough and the Sharpsburg Police Department.  The Arbitrators decision must be rendered within thirty (3) days after hearing.

ARTICLE XVIII - LONG TERM DISABILITY INSURANCE NON-JOB RELATED The Borough shall secure Long Term Disability Insurance for all police officers.  The policy shall provide long term disability benefits which result only from non-job related illnesses or accidents.

The Borough will pay an amount not to exceed ten ($ 1.) dollars per month for each officer.  The balance of the premium is to be paid by the police officer if he wants to participate in the Long Term Disability Insurance Program.  The officers portion of the program shall be a payroll deduction.

ARTICLE IXX - RESIDENCY Full-time police officers must maintain their permanent residence within a ten (1) air mile radius of the boundaries of the Borough of Sharpsburg.

This Agreement specifically incorporates all past contract awards and amendments to the extent that the same are not in conflict with this Agreement and represents all terms and conditions agreed to by the Borough of Sharpsburg and the Police of said Borough and shall remain in effect until December 31 222.

 ARTICLE XX - BILL OF RIGHTS (A)When an anonymous complaint is made against a police officer and no corroborative evidence is obtained the complaint shall be classified as unfounded.

(B)When any citizen complaint (a) alleges facts which if true could not lead to a criminal charge and (b) is filed beyond the legal time limits for filing a civil complaint on such facts then the complaint shall be classified as unfounded and the accused police officer shall not be required to submit a written report but he shall be notified orally or in writing of such claim.  (C)A police officer whether a subject or witness must be informed of the nature of the interrogation at the outset of the interrogation.

(D)If the interrogated police officer writes a written statement a transcript is taken or mechanical or electronic record is made a copy of the same must be given to the interrogated police officer without cost upon request.

(E)If any police officer under interrogation is under arrest or is likely to be placed under arrest as a result of the interrogation he shall be completely informed of all his rights prior to the commencement of the interrogation.

(F)At the request of any police officer under interrogation heshe shall have the right to be represented by counsel of his choice andor an F.O.P. representative who shall be present at all times during the interrogation.  The interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonable time until representation can be obtained.  (G)Any complaint shall be placed in writing and shall be signed and notarized by the person filing the complaint.  ARTICLE XXI - LAYOFFS No full-time officer may be laid off unless and until any part-time officers are laid offremoved from the schedule and unless and until any full-time officer eligible to retire is placed on retirement status as required by the PA Borough Code.

 IN WITNESS WHEREOF and intending to be legally bound hereby the parties have hereunto set our hands and seals this  day of  219.

ATTESTBOROUGH OF SHARPSBURG   William Rossey Borough Manager Brittany Reno President of Council   SEAL Karen Pastor Chairman Public Safety    Jonathan Jaso Councilman Public Safety    Gregory Domian Chairman Personnel  BOROUGH OF SHARPSBURG POLICE WAGEPOLICE COMMITTEE                                              Officer Daniel Sciulli                                                                                                                                 Officer Jonathon Kimmel                                                                                                                                 Officer Jeffrey Hussar        12       
