COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT  THIS  AGREEMENT  made  and  entered  into  this  day  of  ..Q-J---e.------k---2.--- 217 by and between the TOWNSHIP OF OHIO (hereinafter referred to as Township) and the OHIO TOWNSHIP POLICE ASSOCIATION (hereinafter referred to as Police) was the result of collective bargaining and negotiation as provided for under Act No. 111 of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The above parties hereby consent and agree to be legally bound by the following mutually detennined promises and covenants.

 ARTICLEl RECOGNITION  The Township as employer shall recognize the Police as the exclusive bargaining agent for all patrolmen sergeants and corporals.

ARTICLE2 TERM OF AGREEMENT  The term of this Agreement shall be for four (4) years that is commencing January 1 218 and terminating midnight December 31 221.

ARTICLE3 MANAGEMENT  The parties hereto recognize and agree that the Township through its Board of Supervisors shall direct the operation of the Police Department as provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the ordinances and resolutions of the Township except as expressly provided by certain terms and conditions as set forth in this Agreement.

The operation of the Police includes but is not limited to the right to 1.

 Direct the officers of the Township Police Department in compliance with recognized Department Organization and Manual of Policy - Rules and Procedures and as included herein by reference.

 2.

 Hire promote transfer assign and retain employees in positions and to suspend demote discharge or take disciplinary action against said officers.

 3.

 Relieve employees from duties for legitimate reasons.

 4.

 Maintain the efficiency of the Township in supplying police 2  protection.

5.

 Detennine the methods means job classifications and personnel by which such police protection is to be supplied.

 6.

 Take whatever actions may be necessary to carry out the missions of the Police of the Township in situations of emergency.

 7.

 Determine reasonable schedules of work and duties and establish the methods and processes by which such work and duties are performed.

 ARTICLE4 GRIEVANCEPROCEDURE The parties hereto because of entering into this Agreement fully expect and intend that the relationship between the parties hereto shall have been fully settled for the terms of the Collective Bargaining Agreement.

The parties agree hereby to exercise this Agreement in good faith and carry out the terms and conditions of this Agreement in the same manner. In the event any dispute arises out of the provisions of this Agreement or the interpretation thereof such disputes shall be settled by the following grievance and arbitration procedure upon origination of either party  I.

 The purposes of the procedure is to secure at the lowest possible level equitable solutions to the problems that may from time to time arise affecting the Police officers of the Township.

 2.

 Both parties agree that the proceedings will be kept as informal and confidential as may be appropriate at any level of the procedure.

However both parties agree that informality does not apply to the time limits established herein for the filing of grievances and responses thereto.

 3  A. DEFINITIONS 1.

 A grievance is hereby defined as (1) a complaint by an officer group of officers  entire shift of officers or the entire police force regarding the meaning interpretation or application of any provision of this Agreement andor (2) the Township or any of its agents acting in bad faith or in an arbitrary or capricious manner contrary to this Agreement or established policies or practices governing or affecting the officers covered by this Collective Bargaining Agreement.

 In those areas in which the Township has management rights the  exercise of said rights without consultation with the members of the police force or their representatives shall not constitute acting in bad faith or in an arbitrary or capricious manner. A grievance can include discipline but only to the extent that the discipline includes a demotion or a reduction in rank of a full-time officer or discipline that effects the compensation of a full-time officer. An officer has the right to respond in writing to any matters or letters placed in their individual employee files and to have the response kept in the file along with said matters or letters.

2.

 An aggrieved person is a person(s) who may make a claim including the entire  police force. This shall include the entire police force in a group grievance situation.

8. PROCEDURE - TIME LIMIT  1.

 Since it is important that the grievance be processed as rapidly as possible the  number of days indicated at each level should be considered as the maximum and every effort should be made to expedite the process. In the event that the Township should not respond in the requested amount of time it will be construed by the grievant or aggrieved person(s) that the Township agrees with and sustains the grievance presented and the Township will immediately  4  grant to the officer grievant or aggrieved person(s) the relief sought in the grievance. The time limit specified however may be extended to a specific number of days by mutual agreement in writing by both parties.

C. GRIEVANCE LEVELS The procedure shall be as follows  STEP I - Any police officer who believes he has a grievance may submit his grievance in writing to the Chairman of the grievance Committee of the Police Department. Such grievance shall be submitted within two (2) weeks of the day on which the matter giving rise to the grievance occurred.

 STEP II - The grievance filed with the Grievance Committee shall be submitted to the Chief of Police (or person in charge of Police if there is no Chief) for adjustment and settlement within two (2) weeks. The Chief of Police (or person in charge of Police) shall render his decision in writing within two (2) weeks of said adjustment and settlement.

 STEP III - The grievance filed with the Grievance Committee shall be submitted to the Township Manager for adjustment and settlement within two (2) weeks. The Township Manager shall render his decision in writing within two (2) weeks of said adjustment and settlement.

 STEP IV - The Grievance Committee may within two (2) weeks thereafter appeal the decision of the Township Manager to the Board of Supervisors.

 The Board of Township  Supervisors shall render a decision within one (1) week of their next regularly scheduled monthly meeting of the Board of Supervisors.

D. ARBITRATION In the event the grievance is not settled in Step IV of the Grievance Procedure it may be  5  referred to an arbitrator within fifteen (15) days after receipt of the decision in Step IV. In order to refer the matter to arbitration the party seeking arbitration must give written notice to the other party of such desire. The parties shall jointly request within ten (1) days of the date of request for arbitration the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service or Pennsylvania Bureau of Mediation to submit to the parties the names of five (5) arbitrators from which the arbitrator shall be selected by each party alternately striking a mane until only one remains. The last remaining name shall be the arbitrator. The parties shall select said arbitrator within ten (1) days of the receipt of said list.

The arbitrator shall have no authority to alter change amend or modify any term of this Agreement. The decision and cost of the arbitrator as set forth in this grievance procedure or any arbitrator selected pursuant to any term of this Collective Bargaining Agreement shall be borne equally between the parties and the decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on both parties.

If either party fails to respond in the time limits set forth within the grievance process the grievance is automatically resolved in favor of the other party.

 ARTICLES RESIDENCY All full-time police officers must reside within a twenty (2) air miles of the site of the Ohio Township Municipal Building.

 ARTICLE6 WORKING CONDITIONS No police officer shall be required to work or use the facilities or equipment provided to the Township that is unsafe or hazardous or injurious to the officers safety well-being and 6  welfare. This detennination shall be made by the officer in charge of the shift at the beginning of the shift if called to his attention by an officer.

When an anonymous complaint is made against a police officer and no corroborative evidence is obtained the complaint shall be classified as unfounded.

When any citizen complaint is filed greater than ninety (9) calendar days after the date of the alleged event complained of which iftme could not lead to a criminal charge such complaint shall be classified as unfounded and the accused employee shall not be required to submit a written report but he shall be notified orally or in writing of such claim.

A police officer whether a subject or witness must be informed of the nature of the interrogation at the outset of the interrogation.

If the interrogated police officer writes a written statement a transcripts taken or  mechanical record made a copy of same must be given to the interrogated police officer without cost upon request.

If any police officer under interrogation is under arrest or is likely to be placed under  arrest as a result of the interrogation he shall be completely infonned of all his rights prior to the commencement of the interrogation.

At the request of any police officer under interrogation he shall have the right to be represented by counsel of his choice andor an Association representative who shall be present at all times during the interrogation. The interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonable time until representation can be obtained.

Unless agreed to by the officer and the municipality neither the officer nor the municipality shall make any public comment on the reason for any disciplinary action brought  7  against said officer.

 ARTICLE7 VACATIONS Police officers of the Township shall be entitled to the following vacation benefits Years of Service 6 Months -  1 Year l-4Years 5 - 9Years 1 - 2 Years Over Twenty Years  Vacation Allowance One (1) Week Two (2) Weeks Three (3) Weeks Four (4) Weeks One (1) day per year up to Five (5) Weeks  Vacation requests for three (3) days or less must be made at least fifteen (15) days prior to the requested date and shall be subject to approval by the Chief of Police. Vacation requests for one (1) week or more must be made at least thirty (3) days prior to requested date and shall be subject to approval by the Chief of Police.

 In the case of an emergency or unforeseeable  circumstance all efforts will be made to accommodate such requests without the full fifteen (15) or thirty (3) days notice. Vacation time shall accrue on January 1 of each year based upon the years of service anniversary date that will be obtained in said calendar year.

 ARTICLES HOLIDAYS Each police officer shall receive eleven (11) paid holidays each year if employed throughout the year 1.

 2.

3.

4.

5.

 6.

 New Years Day Presidents Day Easter Sunday Memorial Day Fourth of July Labor Day  7.

8.

 Veterans Day Thanksgiving Day Christmas Day Personal Choice Personal Choice.

 9.

1.

11.

 The day celebrated as the holiday shall be considered as the holiday. If a police officer is  8  required to work a period of at least eight (8) hours on any of said holidays then he shall receive twelve (12) hours vacation with pay subject to the requirements of Article 7 hereof to be taken during the calendar month in which the holiday falls or the month following or the said police officer shall be paid twelve (12) hours of regular pay.

Holidays cannot be saved and utilized other than within the two (2) week pay period on which the actual calendar day of said holiday falls where the date on which said holiday is celebrated at the state andor federal level. Saving said holiday and utilizing it on a different day other than the actual holiday is totally within the discretion of the Township subject to the ability to reasonably schedule any such request. an employee requesting to save said holiday and utilize it on another day and thereby working the holiday suspends the holiday pay requirements as set forth in the contract so that the employee will receive straight time for working said holiday.

ARTICLE9 PENSION HOSPITAL SURGICAL MAJOR MEDICAL DENTAL LIFE INSURANCE AND ARREST INSURANCE PROGRAMS  The Township shall provide the following I.

 Pension Plan under the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Program so long as  funds received by the Township from the tax on Premiums of Foreign Casualty Companies (72 P.S. Sec. 2263.1) are sufficient to keep the fund actuarially sound. In the event it is detennined in the opinion of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board that the fund is actuarially unsound the Township shall have no responsibility to make such contributions on behalf of the employees and the employees shall make a contribution of five percent (5). Any change in the pension provider requires the consent of seventy-five percent (75) of the Police Association members.

 9  2.

 The Township acknowledges current coverage as United Healthcare Choice EPO  for medical insurance Concordia Flex Plan for Dental Insurance and Vision Benefits of America for Vision Insurance as per attached Exhibit A.

 In addition to hospitalization and  medicalsurgical benefits the Township will provide a dental insurance plan for all Police Officers and their eligible dependents and a basic prescription drug program for all Police Officers and their eligible dependents. Additionally the Township shall have the right to change such insurance coverages to plans andor providers which constitute substantially comparable coverage. Substantially comparable as used in this provision does not mean exactly the same. The Association however retains the right to grieve the Townships  determination  that a change provides substantially comparable coverage. If the Association does not agree that the plans andor providers selected by the Township are substantially comparable the Association will so state in writing to the Township.

 In that event the Township may not  unilaterally implement the change however in the absence of agreement the parties immediately shall process the dispute before a neutral arbitrator selected pursuant to the arbitration step of the grievance procedure for expedited determination. The expedited decision of the arbitrator as to whether the providers andor plans proposed by the Township are or are not substantially comparable shall be issued within forty-five (45) calendar days of the Associations written notice contesting the providers andor plans selected and shall be final and binding as a determination of whether the Township is or is not authorized to select such providers or implement the proposed plans. Health care benefits as set forth in this Paragraph shall not be less than those provided to any other Ohio Township .employee. The Township shall be responsible for the full payment on said coverage for employee and their eligible dependents including  spouse and children.

3.

 A Health Care Review Committee shall be formed with one representative from  Office Personnel the Department of Public Works and the Police Department as well as at least one member of Administration to review current health care plans and other available plans on an annual basis.

 Said Committee members must be participants in the Township health care  coverage. The Committee may provide non-binding advisory recommendations to the Township.

4.

 Term Life Insurance in the amount of Fifty Thousand Dollars ($5.). Any  rights privileges options and ownership to such policy shall be made available to any officer upon his retirement.

5.

 False Arrest Insurance and General Liability Insurance providing limits of liability  equal or greater than existing coverage at the time of the execution of this Agreement.

6.

 Any officers choosing not to accept medical coverage as set forth herein shall  receive fifty percent (5) up to a maximum of $35. annually for individual coverage and $75. annually for family coverage of the savings to the Township as calculated by the amount of premium not paid by the Township due to said election as additional income over and above that provided herein. Said savings shall be paid quarterly by the Township.

7.

 Retirees andor part-time officers to the extent permitted by the pooled insurance  plan utilized by the Township for medical benefits shall be permitted to purchase medical insurance following retirement at their own expense until they are eligible for medicare. The parties hereto understand that to the extent coverage is available said coverage may differ as to the extent of benefit and cost of premium to the retiree.

8.

 Short-term and long-term disability insurance shall be provided by the Township  11  upon said terms and conditions as the Township shall negotiate from time to time during the course of this Agreement with its current insurance carriers or said carriers successors.

9. Full-time officers attending regularly scheduled uniformed services training shall be entitled to the minimum that is required to be provided under applicable state and Federal law.

ARTICLE 1 POLICE UNIFORM REPLACEMENT AND MAINTENANCE ALLOWANCE  Full-time officers shall receive a uniform allowance in the amount of$9. in each year of the contract. Said allowance shall be paid in one lump sum on April I of each year.

Any damage to an officers uniform which occurs while working for the Township in the course of his duties shall be replaced by the Township over and above said allowance. Any changes in the uniform or required equipment shall be paid by the Township over and above said unifonn allowance.

The Township agrees to purchase body armorbody vests constituting Full Coverage Second Chance body armor or the equivalent for any and all full-time employees who request such purchase. Thereafter said body armor shall be replaced by the Township as set forth in the applicable manufacturers warranty. In the event that a full-time officer chooses to request that the Township purchase body armor said body armor must be worn by said officer on all shifts of duty for the Township.

Newly hired full-time employees shall be provided with a full unifonn. This will be done seasonally during their first year of employment with approximately one-half of their uniform needs as determined by the Township supplied when hired and the remainder at the conclusion of a six month probationary period. Said new hires will not receive a uniform allowance during the initial twelve month period of employment and to the extent there is a portion of a calendar 12  year following said initial 12 month period of employment said new hire will receive a pro rated uniform allowance for the balance of said calendar year Part-time employees following the completion of one (1) year of service shall receive a $4. uniform allowance reimbursement for said first year of service. For the balance of any calendar year following their first year of service they shall receive a pro-rated uniform allowance based upon the uniform allowance then in effect for said part-time employees. For the term of this Agreement the uniform allowance for part-time employees as set forth herein shall be $4..

ARTICLE 11 HOURS OF WORK. OVERTIME AND COURT TIME PAY  1.

 The regular work day for police officers shall consist of one eight (8) hour shift per  day and thirty (3) minutes off for a lunch period.

The regular work week for police officers shall be forty (4) hours per week consisting of five (5) consecutive work days. A work week is defined as beginning with the first shift on Sunday at 121 a.m. and ending with the last shift on Saturday. Shift selection shall be by discretion of the Chief.

2.

 The regular work week for the police department until altered is the sole discretion  of the Township and shall consist of three shifts per day for a total of twenty-one (21) shifts per week.

If a police officer is required to work either before or after his regular eight (8) hour shift  in a twenty-four (24) hour period he shall receive overtime pay as defined herein for the actual time worked. Overtime pay will not be paid to a police officer until such police officer works  13  over eight (8) hours in any one (1) day or more than forty (4) hours in such work week. Such overtime payment will be made on the basis of either daily and weekly overtime worked but a policeman shall not be paid both daily and weekly overtime for the same overtime hours worked.

Extra duty assignments as defined and set forth in this Agreement shall be utilized in computing overtime pay.

Overtime pay shall be paid for at one and one-half (1-12) times the policemans regular pay.

3.

 Compensation time in lieu of overtime pay may be accrued by full-time officers  to a maximum of forty (4) hours of compensation time. This is not a maximum total for any given year but rather a maximum running total for the accrual of compensation pay. Any request to utilize compensation time is subject to the following limitations a.

b.

c.

 4.

 Any request to utilize compensation time in excess of eight (8) hours must be requested one month in advance Any request for compensation time cannot create overtime pay for a shift replacement and Compensation time cannot be taken during the month of December.

 Overtime as defined in this Contract shall first be offered to full-time patrolmen  or sergeants as set forth herein.

 The Township within its management rights specifically  reserves the right to utilize part-time employees for the filling-in of any shift not manned in the course of the regular forty (4) hour per week full-time employee shift. In the event that the Township cannot schedule such a shift without the payment of overtime said overtime shall first be offered to full-time patrolmen sergeants and corporals on the basis of their overall seniority constituting their time of employment with the Township as a full-time employee. If patrolmen sergeants and corporals do not volunteer for such duty the Township in its discretion may offer it to the part-time employees. In the event that no part-time or full-time employee volunteers for 14  said duty the Township may direct an employee in its discretion to fill said shift.

5.

 Court time as approved for official Township business shall be compensated as  follows  6.

 a.

 Any hearings at the district magistrate level shall be compensated based upon the actual time expended by the officer in court subject to a two (2) hour minimum.

 b.

 Court time for hearings in common pleas court or in federal district court shall be compensated based upon a minimum of one-half() pay day. If the officer attends the morning session of court and is required to return to court following the lunch recess then he shall be compensated for a full days pay.

 c.

 The Township will reimburse any officer the maximum mileage allowance allowed by the Internal Revenue Service Regulations for all court hearings at the District Magistrate level Common Pleas Court level or Federal District Court level. Said mileage shall be calculated based upon mileage from the Township Municipal Building to said court hearing and the return to the Municipal Building. For hearings at the Common Pleas Court or Federal District Court level parking shall be reimbursed up to a maximum of $23. per day in 218 $24. per day in 219 $25. per day in 22 and $26. per day in 221.

 d.

 All court appearances shall be in full police uniform and court time compensation applies to both full-time and part-time employees.

 Part-time officers shall not be removed from shifts that have already been  scheduled for the purpose of avoiding overtime for court hearings. All officers both full-time and part-time must provide copies of all hearing notices and pre-trial screening notices upon receipt to the Chief of Police for purposes of scheduling shifts.

ARTICLE 12 SICK LEAVE  1.

 An officer off sick must call in two (2) hours prior to the start of his shift. The  15  officer in charge will check on an officer on the second day such officer is sick.

2.

 Each full-time police officer shall receive ten (1) paid sick leave days for each  year. A full-time police officer must complete his first six (6) months of employment before being eligible for any sick days and upon the completion of said six (6) month period sick leave is to be calculated as set forth in Article 16 Paragraph 6.

3.

 All sick leave absences over three (3) days must be verified by a medical doctor  before the employee returns to work. For any said absences upon receiving verification by a medical doctor that the policeman was unable to work due to sickness the Township will cover up to one hundred and eighty (18) days of accumulated sick leave pay.

4.

 Each officer shall receive credit for the sick days he has accumulated to the date of  this Agreement up to a maximum of one hundred and eighty (18) days. Upon retirement a police officer will receive payment for the unused sick leave days up to a maximum of one hundred and eighty (18) days based upon one-half() of his regular wage rate in effect at the time of his retirement.

5. Any accumulated sick leave over and above 18 days shall be reimbursed by the Township to Employee in each calendar year on the basis of one-half of the rate in effect for said Officer in the calendar year that said leave was incurred.

ARTICLE 13 EXTRA DUTY PAY  1.

 Extra duty defined as functions requiring the presence of a police officer and paid  for by agencies other than the Township with the exception of the Township contracts for fulltime police services shall be first offered to full-time officers on the basis of overall seniority. If said duty is not filled by full-time officers it shall be offered to part-timers on the basis of overall 16  seniority.

2.

 Extra duty pay for church school or ACCORD functions shall be paid as follows  during the term of this Agreement 218 $45.

 219 $47.

 22 $49.

 221 $51.

 Construction duty pay for projects requiring traffic control shall be paid as follows during the term of this Agreement 218 $6.

 219 $62.

 22 $64.

 221 $66.

 All extra duty shall be with a minimum payment of four (4) hours for each assignment.

This includes full-time and part-time officers. Officers will not be offered extra duty if it requires them calling off a regularly scheduled shift or if said officer is on leave at the time of said extra duty.

ARTICLE 14 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE  Each police officer shall be entitled to the following bereavement leave based upon consecutive days off including the day of the funeral 1.

 Immediate family - spouse child father mother brother sister parent-in-law  grandparent. Entitlement is to three (3) consecutive days off including the day of the funeral with any scheduled shifts during said three (3) days to be paid as bereavement leave.

2.

 Blood uncle blood aunt blood nephew blood niece brother-in-law sister-in-law  and grandparent-in-law. Entitlement is to the day of the funeral off with payment to be made for any shift scheduled on said day as bereavement leave.

 17  ARTICLE 15 NON-DISCRIMINATION The parties hereto agree that the terms of this Agreement shall be applied to all police officers irrespective of rank without regard to color creed sex national origin or political affiliation or non-job related handicap and that there shall be no discrimination interference intimidation restraint or coercion by the Township or any of its agents against any member of the police force because of his membership in the collective bargaining unit or participation in the grievance andor arbitration process and no police officer employed by the Township waives any of his rights privileges or immunities afforded to the police officer under the Constitution of the United States of America or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any laws that flow therefrom.

 ARTICLE 16 SALARIES 1.

Salaries of the police officers of the Township shall be as follows during the term of this Agreement  st  1 Year Patrolman 2 nd Year Patrolman 3-dYear Patrolman th 4 Year Patrolman 5th Year Patrolman Detective Corporal Sergeant  218 $45 $53691 $58934 $6525 $71344 $73424 $73424 $7554  219 $45 $55839 $61291 $67626 $74198 $76361 $76361 $78524  22 $47 $5872 $63743 $7331 $77166 $79415 $79415 $81665  221 $47 $6395 $66292 $73144 $8252 $82592 $82592 $84932  The pay rates set forth in this Agreement shall be effective as of the anniversary hire date for each individual employee. The purpose of this language is to insure that each employee will only receive the next step of patrolmans wages following the completion of each year of actual employment.

18  2.

 Longevity pay shall be paid based upon a lmnp sum payment of an additional  $3. on December 1st of the year following the accumulation of five (5) years of continued service to the Township.

 Said amount shall increase annually thereafter at a rate of $6.

 annually up to a maximmn of $15..

3.

 Part-time officers shall be defined as those employees filling in shifts not manned  by the regular forty (4) hour per week full-time police officers. Said part-time officers may upon occasion work forty (4) or more hours per week and receive appropriate overtime compensation as set forth herein. However those part-time officers that are not hired as regular full-time officers and therefore do not have regular forty (4) hour per week work scheduled shall be classified as part-time officers and are only entitled to the benefits and privileges set forth in Article 16 of this Agreement dealing with hourly rates and holiday pay Article 13 dealing with extra duty pay Article 11 pertaining to the calculation of overtime and court time pay and the provision of Article 1 relating to uniform allowance. All other provisions in this Agreement apply to full-time officers only.

4.

 Part-time officers shall receive holiday pay rates constituting time and one-half (1-  12) for working on New Years Day Easter Sunday Memorial Day Fourth of July Labor Day Thanksgiving and Christmas Day.

5.

 Part-time employees who are designated by the Chief of Police as Officer in  Charge (OIC) of their shift shall receive an additional 75 cents per hour over their normal hourly rate of pay on said shift. Full-time employees so designated shall receive an additional 96 cents per hour over their normal hourly rate of pay on said shift.

Part-time officers wage rates are as follows  19  Starting 1 Year Plus 3 Year Plus  6.

 218 $16.25 $18.75 $19.25  219 $16.75 $19.25 $19.75  22 $17.25 $19.75 $2.25  221 $17.75 $2.25 $2.75  Newly hired full-time police officers are subject to a one (1) year probationary  period of employment. The Chief of Police shall evaluate said officer during this period and advise the officer in writing as to whether or not he has successfully completed said probationary period. If the probationary period is not successfully completed the officer shall be so notified in writing and discharged said discharge not being subject to the provisions in Article 4 of this Agreement.

During the initial six (6) months of said probationary period the probationary fulltime officer is not eligible for sick leave benefits but shall have the option to purchase hospitalization insurance and life insurance through the Township with the Township reimbursing them for one-half() of the cost of said insurance subject to the limitations as to the provision of hospitalization insurance set forth in Article 9 Paragraph 2. Following the six (6) month probationary period said officers shall be eligible for a pro-rated number of sick days based upon the balance of the calendar year applicable to the beginning of said second six ( 6) month period. Thereafter said probationary officers shall be eligible for full sick leave. The Township shall pay full premiums for hospitalization and life insurance during said second six ( 6) month portion of their probationary period as provided in Article 9 Paragraphs 2 3 and 5. Only full-time officers no longer on probation shall be eligible to receive a payment based upon not accepting medical coverage as set forth in Article 9 Paragraph 6. Following the completion of the one year probationary period said officers will receive full hospitalization benefits sick leave  2  benefits life insurance benefits and all other benefits as defined herein.

 Said probationary  officers are entitled to one (1) week vacation as set forth in Article 7 but cannot take said vacation until their initial six (6) months of their probationary period is completed.

7.

 Full-time officers shall receive an additional stipend to their annual salary upon obtaining  an associates degree or a bachelors degree.

 Upon successful completion of an associates  degree a full-time officer shall receive an annual stipend of $5..

 Upon successfully  obtaining a bachelors degree there shall be an annual stipend of$1.. Said stipend shall be first paid in the calendar year in which said degree is obtained without proration.

ARTICLE 17 SUSPENSION AND LAY OFF Layoffs and reduction in force shall be by inverse order of seniority. Full-time officers shall have seniority over any and all part-time officers.

ARTICLE 18 CONTINUATION NOTICE One hundred and eighty days (18) days prior to the expiration of this Agreement either party may serve notice on the other to re-negotiate a continuing agreement.

 21  IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto intending to be legally bound hereby have placed their hands and seals this faday of ATTEST  flAnid.1.

ATTEST  t  e1.bct 217.

 O1  TOWNSHIP OF By  z    OHIO TOWNSHIP POLICE ASSOCIATION  22  
