COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT FOR THE YEARS  221  BY AND BETWEEN !THE BOROUGH OF TURTLE CREEK  AND  Tl-IE TURTLE CREEK BOROUGH POLICE DEPARTMENT  PREAMBLE  WHERAS the Borough of Turtle Creek and the Turtle Creek Borough Police  Department have over the years entered into various agreements concerning  wages fringe benefits hours of employment and other terms and conditions of employment and  WHERAS various awards of arbitration have been handed down concerning  police wages and fringe benefits hours of employment and the terms and conditions of employment and  WHERAS the Borough the Full-Time Police and the Part-Time Police who are  represented by the Full-Time Police seek now to enter into an agreement  covering all areas of wages fringe benefits hours of employment and other  terms and conditions of employment as established by the various awards and prior practices.

 WHERAS THEREFORE THE FOLLOWING IS MUTUALLY AGREED AS FOLLOWS  ARTICLE I  TERM OF AGREEMENT  THE TERM OF THIS AGREEMENT SHALL BE FOR A PERIOD OF ONE (1) YEAR BEGINNING JANUARY 1 221 AND ENDING ON DECEMBER 31 221.

 ARTICLE II  COMPENSATION A. Salaries- Full-Time Patrolman 221 - January 1 221 Two and One Quarter Percent-$64463.

July 1 221- One Quarter Percent Increase - $64624.

 B. Starting WagES and Classifications for New Hires 1) Patrolman I - Probationary Officer Zero to Six Months- Part-Time Hourly Rate in the calendar year of hiring plus $.5 per hour.

 2) Patrolman II - Six Months to Twelve Months - Seventy (7) Percent of Patrolman IV  base salary.

3) Patrolman Ill - Twelve Months to Twenty Four Months - Seventy Five (75) Percent of Patrolman IV base salary.

 4) Patrolman IV -After Twenty Four Months - Full Rate C. Part-Time Wages 221 -January 1 221 - Two and One Quarter Percent Increase - $19.27 per hour July 1 221- One Quarter Percent Increase - $19.32 per hour  D. Longevity Pay In addition to wages full-time employees shall receive longevity pay in the amount of Fifty  (5) Dollars per year of employment up to a maximum of Twenty Five (25) years of service  or One Thousand (1) Dollars. This benefit begins only after the fifth (5) year of service.

  E. Overtime 1) Employees including part-time police shall be paid at the rate of time and one half for all  hours worked In excess of forty (4) hours in any work week or in excess of eight (8) hours in any work day.

 2) Any full-time officer eligible for overtime compensation may elect at his option to take  compensatory time in lieu of overtime. Compensatory time cannot exceed forty (4) hours  maximum accumulation. To the extent to which it exceeds forty (4) hours it is lost.

 Compensatory time will be granted at the rate of time and one half for overtime worked per each hour.

 3) The officer prior to taking compensatory time off shalt give twelve (12) hours notification to the Chief of Police. However in cases of exigent circumstances it shall be left to the discretion of the Chief of Police whether compensatory time shall be granted with less than twelve (12) hours notification.

 4) If the Chief of Police denies a request for compensatory time off he shall in writing explain the reason for the denial.

F. OvertimeExtra Duty  1) A police officer sha II be paid at the rate of time and one half for a II hours worked in excess of forty (4) hours in any work week or in excess of eight (8) hours in any work day.

 2) With respect to overtime or extra duty seniority on a rotating basis shall be the first and and primary consideration in assigning overtime.

 3) The Mayor shall maintain a chart which shall be posted within the police office. It shall be open to all police for inspection at all times. This chart shall list the names of all police  officers both fu11-time and part-time. The names of the full-time police shall be listed first  by order ofseniority. They shall then be followed by the names of the part-time police by  order of ser1iority.

 4) In the event of a call off or the availability of extra duty this list shall be followed in its  designated order. Once the particular assignment has been filled the name next on the  list shall have the right of first refusal for any future call offs or extra duty that becomes available.

5) If the officer next in line for overtime or extra duty is already currently on duty or is scheduled to work that particular day it shall be left to the discretion of that officer  whether to accept or refuse the overtime or extra duty.

 6) Overtime and extra duty shall be distributed equally and fairly to all police on a  regular basis and that seniority shall govern first preference on a rotating basis.

 7) In the event that an officer or officers are placed on an on call status or on a stand by  status which shall place restrictions on his or her personal time the officer or officers  shall be compensated for the period of time in which their personal time is restricted.

 Compensation shall be in the form of compensatory time.

 8) A part-time officer may work in excess of thirty two (32) hours in one work week if that officer is called into work from the overtime chart.

9) Any police officer who is called into work for any reason shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours pay at the regular hourly rate. However if the time worked exceeds four (4)  hours the officer shall be compensated at time and one half for all hours worked.

G. Miscellaneous Compensation  1) Officer in Charge - Any full-time patrolman required to serve in a supervisory capacity  shall receive an additional rate of $.61 per hour for the time in said supervisory capacity.

 2) Shift Differential - Full-time patrolman shall receive an additional $.68 per hour shift differential for shifts between the hours of 3 p.m. and 7 a.m. When an officer  works first shift 7 a.m. to 3 p.m. and then works overtime he shall not receive differential pay for his overtime.

3 Holiday Pay- If regular scheduled day off vacation or holiday hourly wage rate at  standard amount is paid. Full-time officers who work a paid holiday shall be paid at the  rate of time and one half. At the end of the calendar year nine (9 accumulated paid  holidays are lump summed and included in the first pay of December as is the longevity  pay.

 4) Attendance at Criminal Proceeding Under Subpoena to Testify for the Prosecution  a) Magistrate Hearings - Any officer required to appear before a magistrate or at a  magistrates hearing on off duty time shall receive a minimum of two (2) hours pay at  the standard rate. If the time spent exceeds two (2) hours the officer shalt be compensated at time and one half for all time spent.

 b) Court Days -All appearances in Commonwealth Court City Court Federal Court  32 Hearing shall be compensated at five (5) hours at time and one half rate. The  practice of attending pre-trial screenings effective January 1 215 and thereafter  will only be approved with written documentation by the District Attorneys Office.

 Attendance shall be compensated at five (5) hours at overtime rate. Reports  pertaining to pre-trial effective January 1 215 and thereafter must be faxed.

 c) When a police officer is required to transport evidence to the Allegheny County  Crime Lab he shall receive two (2) hours pay at the regular rate. These hours shall  not be compensated at an overtime rate even if they ca use the officer to exceed  forty (4) hours in a given week.

 d) All police officers shall be reimbursed for parking expenses for all court appearances  including trips to the Allegheny County Crime Lab. The officer is required to provide a parking lot receipt to the Borough. A reimbursement check shall be issued to each officer at the end of each month which shall not be part of the officers regular pay.

 5. Uniform Allotment  Full-Time Police 219 - $95.

22- $95.

 Part-Time Police 219 - $575.

22- $575.

 a) Part-Time Police must work a minimum of two hundred (2) hours in the previous year before obtaining a uniform voucher.

 b) In the case of a new part-time hire the officer shall be given a voucher to obtain two (2) uniform shirts and two (2) uniform pants. The voucher shall not exceed One Hundred Fifty ( 15) Dollars.

c) Prior to the purchase of any uniform or related item the police officer prior to obtaining a  purchase order shall submit to the Mayor or hisher designee a list of items he intends to  purchase. The Mayor or hisher designee shall then submit said list of approved items to the Borough Office who shall then issue a purchase order to the officers for only those  items or at the officers request fax said purchase order to the vendor of the officers choice. Only those items on said purchase order will be honored by the vendor.

 ARTICLE Ill BENEFITS A) Vacations  The following vacation schedule shall be adhered to based upon years offull-time service.

After One (1) Year- One (1) Week  Two (2) Years through Five (5) Years - Two (2) Weeks  Six 6) Years through Twelve (12) Years - Three (3) Weeks  Thirteen (13) Years through Nineteen (19) Years - Four (4) Weeks Twenty (2) Years and after - Five (5) Weeks Ful I-Time Officers shall also be entitled to Five (5) personal days off per year.

The Mayor shall establish a vacation schedule. However the Mayor shall be reasonable in hisher decisions to schedule vacations so as not to be unmindful of the wishes of all persons on the police department. Moreover the Mayor shall be reasonable in hisher  determinations of when vacations shall be taken and shall take reasonable steps to provide the vacation time requested by an officer so long as it does not interfere with the smooth  functioning of the police department as a whole. The Mayor shall exercise hisher discretion to assure that there shall be a suitable number of police officers on duty at all times for the safety of the Borough.

 B) Holidays and 11ersonal Days 1) Holidays a) The full-time members of the police department shall receive nine (9) holidays per year 6) Veterans Day 1) New Years Day 2) Easter  3) Memorial Day 4) Fourth of July  5) Labor Day  7) Thanksgiving  8) Christmas  9) Employees Birthday  b) Full Time Officers Anniversary Date of Hire -At the officers choosing he may elect on  his Anniversary Date of Hire to either take that day as a paid day off or if he chooses to work he shall be compensated at the rate of time and one half. If said day should fall  on the officers pass days he shall receive eight (8) hours of compensatory time. No  additional compensation shall be required.

 2 Bereavement Leave - Each full-time officer shall be entitled to three (3) days off for the death and funeral of anyone in his immediate family. Immediate family shall be deemed to include spouse child parent brother sister foster chitd step parent  step child or any lineal. The three (3) days shall terminate with the date of the funeral.

If any of the three (3) days do not coincide with the days when the officer is scheduled  to work they shall not be entitled to any extra pay by virtue of this section.

 3) Jury Duty In the event any full-time officer is called for jury duty he shall be entitled to  receive the difference between the amount paid by the summoning authority and the  amount paid under his regular rate of pay. The officer when summoned for jury duty need not work during the twenty four (24) hour period on the same day when he is attending jury duty but shall receive the pay as outlined herein. For purposes of this  section the officer working third shift (11 p.m. to 7 a.m.) shall be deemed to  working only on the date when the hours of work are 12 a.m. to 7 a.m.

 4) Leave Granted to FOP Representative - The department representative to the  Fraternal Order of Police with consent of the Chief of Police is granted four (4) hours paid leave to attend the regular scheduled monthly meeting. The Borough is under no obligation to replace the officer but may do so at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

 5) Acting Chief of Police - If the Chief of Police is unavailable for an extended period of time five (5) consecutive days or at the discretion of the Mayor the senior officer  while serving in the capacity of the Chief of Police shall receive the same hourly rate of pay as the Chief of Police.

C) Sick Leave  1) Each full-time officer shall be entitled to thirteen (13) sick days per year which can be accumulated to an amount of seventy five (75) days but said accumulation shall not  exceed seventy five (75 days. An officer may use only thirty (3) days of accumulated sick leave in one year unless suffering from an extended illness in such event he may use  all seventy five (75) days in one calendar year but only with the approval of Council and in  Councils sole discretion. An employee shall not be deemed to be sick unless he is physically unable to perform his duties.

 2) At the option of a full-time officer he may once annually sell back up to ten (1) of his  annually allocated sick days at seventy five (75) percent of the hourly rate of when they were earned. The officer must give notice of his intention to sell back days no later than s  January 31 t of each calendar year.

 3) Upon retirement an officer may sell back a maximum of Sixty (6) accumulated sick  days at Fifty (5) Percent of the officers average hourly salary over the previous three  (3) years.

 4) Sick days shall not be credited for the purposes of calculating overtime.

D Insurance  1) The Borough shall continue to provide to Full-Time Officers health care coverage.

 If said coverage should include a deductible the employee shall be responsible for  the following 217 - Forty (4) Percent of the deductible or $12.. In 218 Fifty (SO) Percent of the deductible or $15..

 The Borough shall continue to reimburse the employee the difference in the Co-Pays from the previous Health America Flex Choice Plan to the current plan Pa HCR Silver Flex Choice PPO 15 Plan. (Deleted from contract 219 agreement)  The Borough shall meet with representative of the Turtle Creek Wage and Policy  Committee to discuss a change to a comparable healthcare plan. The Borough shall  provide the Union with a side by side comparison of the current plan (see Attached) and the proposed plan. The Borough shall also make available a representative from the  proposed plan to explain it to the employees. If the Union and the Borough are unable to  agree upon such change the Union retains the right to grieve the Boroughs  determination that the plan is comparable. If the Union does not agree that a plan selected by the Borough is comparable the Union will so state in writing to the  Borough within Seven (7) Calendar Days of the plan being presented to the Union by the  Borough or such longer period as mutually agreed to by the parties in writing. In the event that the Union does not agree with the Boroughs comparability determination it  may immediately process the dispute before a neutral arbitrator selected pursuant to the  arbitration step of the grievance procedure. The cost of arbitration for the purpose of this  section only will be shared at the rate of Seventy (7) Percent Borough and Thirty (3)  Percent Turtle Creek Borough Police Officers Association. The decision of the arbitrator on this comparable issue shall be final and binding and will determine if the Borough is authorized to implement the new plan.

 a) The Borough will provide an annual cash payment in the amount of $15. to Full-Time employees who are covered for health care insurance throu gh their spouse.

 Evidence of coverage must be provided prior to payment. The officer shall have the right  to reenter the plan provided by the Borough in the event that his spouses coverage is  terminated for any reason. The officer shall have the option of having this benefit paid  either in one lump sum annually in the first pay in December or in two (2) equal lump  sum payments to be made in the first pay period in July and the first pay period in December.

 b) Dental Coverage - The Borough agrees to provide family dental coverage for Full-Time  Police Officers. The provided plan shall be Concordia Flex F-8W Plan.

 c) Eye Care -The Borough agrees to provide family eye care coverage for Full-Time Police Officers d) Disability InjuryNon Work Related Insurance - If any Full-Time Officer becomes disabled or is unable to work owing to an off duty disability arising from any nature the Borough  shall continue wage payment in the amount of Fifty (5) Percent of his regular wages for  and during the term of an insurance policy the Borough maintains with Assurity Insurance Co. for supplemental pay in the amount of $8. per month.

 An employee must work a minimum of thirteen (13) pay periods or 14 hours in the  previous year to earn his vacation time for the following year. If an employee misses work due to a non-work related disability arising from any nature the officer shall be penalized One (1) vacation day in the following year for each pay period not worked in the current year. The employee shall not be penalized for days missed due to work related disability  of any nature.

 e) Upon retirement the Borough shall continue to pay hospitalization premiums for the officer until the officer qualifies for Medicare . In addition the Borough shall provide a  reimbursable payment of $3. per month to the retiree to cover spousal health care costs. this payment shall end upon the retiree or the retirees spouse qualifying for Medicare or in the event of the death of the employee and or spouse.

 If a retired officer finds post-retirement employment that provides equal or better health care benefits as provided by the Borough the retiree shall be required to enroll in that  plan. In the event those benefits end prior to the retiree reaching Medicare eligibility he may reenroll into the Borough plan until he qualifies for Medicare.

 If the spouse of a retiree is covered by equal or better health care coverage than  provided by the Borough and the retiree is able to enroll in the spouses plan the  retiree must do so. The retiree would then be eligible to receive the cash payment of  $15. as stated in Section D Subsection la.

 2) Life Insurance - The Borough shall provide and pay for all premiums of insurance so that  each Full-Time Officer while an active duty employee of the Borough shall be insured in  the amount of $25. with double indemnity protection. Upon retirement of an  employee the Borough shall provide $1. life insurance coverage premium to be paid by the Borough.

 3) False Arrest Insurance - The Borough shall continue the False Arrest Liability Insurance on all police activities. A copy of the insurance policy shall be provided to the Bargaining Unit.

 ARTICLE IV  WORKING CONDITIONS A Hours of Work - The normal work week shall consist of eight (8) consecutive hours of work.

The normal work week shall consist of Five (5) consecutive eight (8) hour days totaling Forty (4) hours. A predetermined cycle of work days and days off shall be established by the Mayor. The work week begins on Saturday at 11 p.m. and ends the following Saturday at  11 p.m.

 B) Conduct - The Borough reserves to itself the right as it has done in the past to promulgate  by resolution of the Council rules and regulations covering the personal conduct of pollce officers the use of equipment and any and all other matters which it deems necessary to  the administration of the police force. a copy of these rules for conduct has been made available to the unit.

 C) Shift Preference - The Mayor will set shifts of Five (5) consecutive days and the police will  select by seniority. The Five (5) days must be for the same shift in each day with the same starting time and the same ending time unless overtime is involved. The Five (5) consecutive days need not be In the same work week.

 Shift bids will be submitted to the Mayor annually on or before December 1 st of each  calendar year. The schedule shall then become effective the first day of the first new pay period of the new year.

 If the Mayor should change the schedule it shall be re-bid. Full-Time officers may agree to  trade shifts on a day for a day basis subject to the following restrictions  1) The exchange may only be on a One (1) day for One (1) day basis.

2) The exchange will not result in any overtime.

3) No less than Forty Eight (48) hours notice must be given to the Chief of Police prior to the start of the first shift affected.

4) If the above three criteria are met the exchange will be approved by the Chief of Police unless it unduly interferes with the operations of the police department. If permission is  not granted by the Chief of Police he will be obliged to state his reasons in writing.

 D) Contracted Police Services - If at any time the Borough of Turtle Creek agrees to provide  services to another community the Borough shall be required to engage in collective bargaining with the Police Officers Association with regards to wages only. Collective  bargaining shall be initiated by the Borough within Thirty (3) days of any agreement to provide police services. If the Borough fails to initiate collective bargaining the Police  Officers Association shall have the right to request binding arbitration under the provisions  of ACT 111.

 E) Attendance at Mandatory Training- The Borough in addition to wages shall cover any and  all costs pertaining to attendance of annual mandatory in-service training.

 Part-Time Officers shall be required to work a minimum of Two Hundred (2) Hours in the  previous year before being eligible for compensation for attending mandatory in-service  training.

 ARTICLE V  PENSION FUND The Borough Pension Ordinance shall be the controlling document of reference pertaining to  the benefits and operating procedures of the pension. The Borough shall be required to notify the Police Association in writing as to any proposed changes to the Pension Ordinance. The Police Association shall be required to sign off on any changes to the ordinance before any changes can take effect.

 The parties hereto acknowledge that the Borough has established two (2) pension plans one of which is being administered by the Indiana Standard Insurance Co. and the other by the Borough of Turtle Creek.

 It is further agreed that the retirement review board shall consist of one (1) police  representative one (1) member of council and one (1) citizen solicited by both parties. Said board shall serve in an advisory capacity only.

Police officers are entitled to retirement at age Fifty (SO) after Twenty Five (25) years of service.

Police officers are also entitled to an early retirement pursuant to ACT 24 after Twenty (2)  years of service at an actuarially reduced rate. This benefit is to begin at the time of retirement.

Police officers are entitled to a service increment in the amount of $1. per month for each  completed year of service in excess of Twenty Five (25) years of service not to exceed $1.

per month and shall be paid in addition to the amount of the Normal Retirement Benefit.

 Disability pensions shall be based on Fifty (5) percent of the officers final average salary over  his last Thirty Six (36) months of employment.

 ARTICLE VI MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS A Part-Time Patrolman - The Borough has the right to employ and use part-time patrolman.

 The Borough shall not deprive full-time patrolman overtime by excessively distributing work to part-time patrolman. Part-time policemen shall be entitled to work Thirty (3) hours per  week. Part-time police may not be assigned work in excess of Thirty Two (32) hours per week when it shall deny overtime work to full-time officers.

B) Scheduling- Scheduling is and shall remain solely within the discretion and exclusive control  of the Mayor.

 C) No Strike Clause -The parties hereto agree that there shall be no strike work stoppage slow downs sit downs or picketing by employees or their representatives. Furthermore there will be no lockouts by the Borough.

 D) Grievance Procedure -Any member of the bargaining unit excluding retired officers shall have the right to file a grievance covering a violation of this agreement or the interpretation to be placed on this agreement however officers shall not have the right to grieve matters of discipline. A grievance must be filed within Ten (1) days of the event which led to the  grievance. A copy of each grievance shall also be filed with the Borough Administrator.

 Step 1-The grievance shall be filed in writing to the Mayor. If the Mayor does not respond to the grievance in writing within Ten (1) days of its filing the grievance shall be deemed to  be denied and will then be submitted to borough Council.

 Step 2 - Borough Council will have Fifteen (15) days to meet with the aggrieved party and  fifteen (15) days thereafter to render a decision.

 Step 3 -If the aggrieved party is unsatisfied with the response of Borough Council he shall have the right within Thirty (3) days of Councils decision to file a request for binding arbitration with the American Arbitration Association. The parties agree to abide by the  arbitration award which shall be final binding and not subject to review. The cost of the  arbitration proceeding shall be equally divided between the parties. Each party shall be responsible for paying its respective representatives or attorney.

 The time limits specified here are calendar days and are to be strictly adhered to so as to assure an orderly and reasonably prompt solution to any problems that arise during  the life of the contract. Therefore any failure to live up to the time limits shall constitute resolution of the grievance and may so be enforced.

This grievance procedure is not intended to and shall not be used to replace civil service laws rules and regulations thereunder.

 E) Reimbursement for TrainingMeals 1) Any officer required to stay overnight for any training seminar the Borough shall provide  lodging and Fifty (5) Dollars per day for meals for each required day of attendance at said seminar. In addition if the officer is required to use his personal vehicle he shall be reimbursed for fuel and compensated for mileage at the IRS regulated rate. Prior approval  and documentation are required.

 2) Any officer while attending a criminal proceeding or training class that goes beyond 12 p.m. shall be reimbursed for meals. The officer is permitted up to Ten (1) Dollars per day. A receipt must be furnished to the Borough. Reimbursement will be made by separate check at the end of each month.

 ARTICLE VII  Bill OF RIGHTS 1) If a complaint is filed against a police officer the complaint must be filed in writing and a copy of said complaint must be provided to the officer if in the event an investigation is  opened concerning the complaint or if it is to be added to the officers personnel file. If the complaint is not in writing it shall be deemed unfounded. Anonymous complaints shall be  deemed unfounded.

 2) A police officer before being interrogated as a subject of an 1nvestigation or a witness thereto must be informed of the nature of the investigation and the subject matter of the interrogation.

 3) A police officer is entitled to a copy of any written statement he submits to the Borough as well as a transcript of any recorded testimony he gives during interrogation. The Borough  shall bear the cost of said transcript.

 However if the testimony is tape recorded then the Borough is only required to give the  officer a copy of the recording and is not required to provide a typewritten transcript.

 4) If a police officer is a suspect of an investigation which may lead to criminal charges or the arrest of the officer he shall be completely informed of all his rights prior to being interrogated.

 5) Any police officer who is to be interrogated shall have the right to be represented during  the interrogation by either an attorney of his choice or a member of the Fraternal Order of Police who shall be present at all time during the interrogation. The cost of the attorney  shall be paid completely by the officer. The interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonable time to allow the officer the chance to obtain representation.

 6) Unless the police officer agrees the Borough shall not make any public comment on the reason for any disciplinary action being sought against an officer.

 7 A police officer shall have the right to review his personnel file but only during regular  business hours (8 a.m. to 4 p.m. Monday through Friday) and said review must be made at the Borough Business Office. The officer may not remove his personnel file from the Borough Building.

 ARTICLE VIII  SAVINGS CLAUSE If any part of this agreement shall be determined to null and void by any act of an arbitrator or  court it shall not affect any other terms of this agreement. Any and all other terms shall remain  in full force and effect.

 
