Table of Contents Section I Section 2 Section 3 ScClion 4  Section 5  AGREEMEKT  DE.TWEEN  Teamsters Local Union No. 25 Representing  South Park Police Department AND  The Township of South Park Effective Dates January I 2! 8 - December 31 221  Section 6 Section 7 Sec1ion8 Section 9 Section 1 Section I I Scc1ion 12 Section 13 Section 14 Section 15 Scclion 16  Scction 17 Section 18 Section 19 Seclion 2 Section 21 Section 22 Section23 Section 24 Seclion 25 Section 26 Section 27 Section 28 Section 29 Section 3 Section 31 Section 32 Section 33 Section 34 Section 35 Section 36 Section 37 Section 38 Section 39 Section 4 Section 41  Recognition.

. .

Dues Cheek-off .

Job Classifications and Wage Rates .

Manogcment Rights .

Past Practice As Is Clause .

Vork Period and Hour Regulations .

Seniority .

Holidays .

Vacation .

 1  I 1 ) 4 4 7  8 9  Grievance5 . l  Suspension and Discharge .

Safcry ..

Jury Duty .

Bereavement .

 I1 12 12 1  Hospitolizotion and Medi en Benefits . 13 Additional Insurances .

14 Insurance Benefits Into Retirement .

Disbility Income Protection .

Loss of Insurance Coverage .

 Pension EmployceContributions .

 14 15 16 16  Sick Leave Definition.17 Unifonn Allowance Maintenance nnd Jireanns . 19 Travel Allovwance .

.2 Educational Police Trainin .

2 Educational Incentive Pny . . .. 2 Nondiscrimination.

. . 21 Occupational lnjmy Workers Compensation . 21 Unemployment Compensation.

. 22 Police Ofiiccrs Bill of Rights .

22 General Provisions .

23 Sepnrn.bilityand Savings Clause . 23 Functions and Duties orPolice Ocpartment. . 23 Military Leave. .

24 General Conduct of Members .

24  In-Service Training.3 Drug and Alcohol Abuse - Statement ofNeed .

Policy on Employee Assistance Program - Sto.tcment ofNecd .

Drug Testing Policy .

Outside Employment.

. .

Job Stewards.

.

.

Effective Date.

. .

 .32 34 .36 .39  4 41  Lnbor Agrccmeul Made and entered into this 1st day of Jammry 218 by rmd between the Township of Soulh Park hereinafter referred 1as Township and Teamsters LocalUnion No. 25 hereinnAcrreferrcd1as 1heUnion1 1  Section l  Lieutenant is Acting Chief then the rate shall be fifteen percent (15) greater than a Patrolman. A Lieutenant shall be considered as Acting Chier only if 1heChiefhns been absent from work for more than thit1y(3) consecutive daysand the Township has not appointedan Acting Chier inhis place.

SCCtion 3.l  Recognition  The Township recognizes Teams1ersLocal Union No.25 as tl1csole and exclusive representativeof  as follows A. First year of service B. Second year of service C. Third year of service D. Fourth year of service E. Fifth year of service F. Sixth yenr of servjce (AAA No. 55-L-36-21-9V)  nll full-time and regular partAimc police officers includingbut not limited to patrolmen sergeants and lieutenants nod excluding the Chief of Police the Depucy Chief of Police and any mher managerial employees. PF-R-81  I 4-W  Section 2  .Junior Patrolmen  A Junior Patrolmnn is defined as n fulltime Police Officer newly hired during the first six (6) years of conseculie employment by the Employer. The wage rates to be paid a Junior Pntrolmnnshallbe  Dues Check-off  I. The Employer agrees to deduct monthly Union Dues nndor unifonn assessments of the Local  Union from the first pay of each month of any employee from whom written authorization is received nnd to send such dues 1 the Secretary-Treasurerof the Union on or before the end of the monlh for which deduction is mnde.

2. The Union agrees to indemnify and save t11cOmploycrhnnnless from any and all claims suits or other fonns ofJinbility Arisingout of deduction of money for all Union dues undertlus Article.

 Section 3.3  6 of a Patrolman base salary 71 of a Patrolmanbase salary 8 of a P1trolmanbase salary 85 of a Patrolman base salary 9 Patrolman base silaryrate 1 PatroJmmbase salary rnte  rart-timt ratrolmtn  Part-time patrolmen if hired by the Township shnll comply with MA Case No. 55-39-24-9 issued November 26 199 Myron L. Joseph Arbitrator. nnd all benefits nnd worki11gconditions shall be negotiated with the Union prior to emp1oyrnentof any Part-time Patrol Officer.

A. Comtensation1999 - $ I .74 per hour  Section 3  .Joh Classificntions and Wage Rates  B. No other benefits except as mandated by law shall beprovided to part-time Patrol Officers.

 The following base roles shall be grunted by the Township ns follows  C. Prt-time Patrol Officers shall not work more than twenty-four (24) hours per week. This restriction is not to intend to applyto court lime.

 Base Salary- Flourty Rotes of Pny  D. Part-time Patrol Officers may not be used while any fulltime Patrol Ofliceris furloughedunless that officer turns down the available work or is othenvisc unavailable.

Sergeant  $47.4  $48.59  $49.8  Patrolman  545.13  $46.26  $47.42  Junior Patrolman Part-Time Patrolman Section 3. l  S51.5 S48.6!  Subject to Section 3.2 Subject to Section 3.3  Rnnl Differential  During the tcnn of this Agreement it is intended at nil times n Sergeant shall be compensated at a rate of five percent (5) greater than the rate paid to a Patrolmn and Lieutenant shall be compensated nt n rate ten percent (1) greater thnn the rnte paid to n Patrolman. Except if a  E. Plrt-timePatrol Officers will not nccrne seniority nor will they work more thnn eight (8) hours in ny day. These restrictions arc not in tenrlcd to prohibit a Part-time Officer from completing his duties or making required court nppearnnces. (l11is is in compliance with AAA File No. 55.

39-218-93 issued February 18 1994 by Carl F. Stoltenberg.) Section 3.4  Longevity  In addition to base salary all membershired prior lo January I 212 shall be entitled to longevity based upontheir nppropriate years of service according to the followingschedule nil calculntionsarc based on base salary rate and are lo be paid on the pay period following the membcrsanniversary date  2  A. Two percent (2) of the base salary rate to be paid at the beginning of the sixth (6th year of service.

B. Three percent (3) of the ba5e si1la.ry rnte to be paid ut the beginning of the eleventh (11th) yenr of service.

 C. Four percent (4) of the bnse salary rnte to be paid at the beginning of the sixteenth (16th) year of service.

 Section 5  Past Prictice. As Is Clause  All existing benefits and prnctices previously enjoyed by members of the bargaining unil noL modified by this Agreement shall remain as is subject to murual negotiations.

 Section 6  fork  Period and Hour Regulations  The workweek shall consist of any five (5) workdays in the calendar week from Sunday through  E. Employees hired after January I 212 shall not be eligible to receive the tongevity benefit as listed herein.

 Saturday. The workdny slinll be nny eight (8) consecutive hours within the period of midnight to midnight pf the calendar day up to one and one half (I ) hours may be in the preceding or subsqnent day. There shall be n minimum of twelve (12) hours olTbeLweenscheduled shifts. A.ny violation of the one and one-half (I ) hour overlap period or the twelve (12) hour minimum between shifts slmll entitle the affected officer to time and one-half(l Vi) his base sn.laryrate for all hours of the violation. This shall include all full-time Police Employees except Junior Patrolmen.

 Section 4  Section 6.l  D. Five percent (5) of the base snlnryrate to be paid at the beginning of the twcnty-firt (2 lst)year of service.

 Mnnngcment Rights  The Township reserves nndretoins solely nnd exclusively nil of its common law rights to rnonogc the business of the Township as such rights existed prior to execution of this agreement including the right to dctermi ne .tdequate employee staffing for all work subject however to the provisions of this Agreement.

Section 4.1  Union Responsibility  The Union ncogni2es and occeJtsthe responsibility of insuring that every employee compics at all times with the South Park Township PoliceManunl nlso known as Resolution No. 6176 a copyof snidmanualbeing allachedhereto. Any grievance arising pursuant to said mmunlsh.111 be disposed of in a manner outlined in the Grievance Procedure in the Agreement. The Union also recognizes nnd accepts the need for frequent updating revision and amendment of the Police Policy Mnnua1.

Section -2  ork Rules  The Union recognizes that the Police Department must beoperated twenty-four (24)hours a day and three hundred six.ty-five (365) days per yeu in this regard the Union recognizes thnt all police employees will cxc11every effort to insure that .idequnte police protection is available nt all times and that sufficient manpower will be availabc to insure effective operntion. Also reisonablework mies may be instituted by the Township after discussing with the Union any disputes over tlic reasonabilityofthe implemenrntion andor npplication of such work rule maybe modesubject to the Grievance Procedure contnined in the Agreement. (This complies with AAA File No. 55-39-21893 issued Fcbnmry 18 1994 Cnrl F. Stoltenberg Arbitrator.) SCrtion 43  Shift Change Clause. Prior Notice  Beginninglanuary219 Ollicer will work theS-2 shin sehcduleproposed by the BargainingUnit on or about August 23 218 and ns disctissed in Executive Sessions on August31 and Seplember 19 218 respectively with the following changes Shift schedules will be posted on a four(4 month rotation. Officers wil 1be pennilted to select their preferred shift schedule by seniority. Officers may not bid the same shin schedule in consecutive order.

For cxample Senior Officer bids the daylight shift the first four month schedule may not bid the daylight shift for the second four month schedule but may once ag.ain bid 1hed1ylightshift forthe third four month schedule and so on for the lerm of this Collective Bargaining Agreement.This will be a continuous process and not restarted each calendar year.

However the fnct that an Officer cannot bid the same shift schedt1lein consecu1iveorder does not by virtue of rm Officers seniority or lack thereof preclude an Officer from being scheduled ind working 1he same shift consecutively ie junior Officers.

All full-time police employees with six (6) or more full years of consecutive service including Lieutenants Sergeants and Patrolmen shall have their schedule postec.Jyearly in dvance in accordance with the Vacation Pick Section of this Agreement. Shifircassignmenthowever may take place whenever nn absence of o.police employee occurs in excess of two (2) weeks due to injury illness emergency or other unforeseen circumstances which would cause o manpower shortngeon any shift. (Shift reassignment will 1.keplace whenever a particular officer bas been absent for two (2) consecutive weeks. The officer will be filling in forthnt shift only and will not be required to also fill the duties of his originol shift. The Township will not make shift reassignments based on lhe combined nbscnces of more than one (1) officer).

 Resirlency  Patrol Officers must esrnblish their primnry residency within a radius of ten air miles of the municipnlitys building. (This complies with AAA File No. 55-39-218-93 issued February 18 1994 Corl F. Stoltenberg Arbitr.itor.)  The Township shall first request volunteers to transfer shffts. rn the absence of volunteers the Township shall transfer the least senior officer(s) excluding sergeants. 1n the event thal the lelst 4  senior officer being transferred has tlready mnde a vacation selection for the time period during which he hns been reassigned. he will be given said vacation that he originally selected at the beginning of the year. However 1hcTo-.11shipcan replace him with the next least senior patrol officer during those vacation days. An exception to this cfausc shall contint1c to be the cnsc of the Lieutemmt who has changed from thediylightshift to nny other shifi to fulfill his responsibilities in the absence of the Chief or Assistant Chief. Such Lieutenant maybe transferred at My time wilhout notice.

Patrolmen with less than six (6) full yearsof consecutive service shall hnve theirscl1edule posted at least two (2) weeks in advance. Rescheduling Palrolmen with less than six (6) Ii.ill years of consecutive service shall not be a violation of this Section.

At the request of either party both parties shall meet for the purpose of discussing and joinlly establishing guidelines under which o chnngc of shift in tl1c posted schelulcs of full-1imc Police employees with six (6) or more full years of consecutive service may be made without penalty to the Township. (MA No. 55-L-36-2199-W) When unusual and extenuating circumstances arise that docs not perm.it following the normal procedure u11derwhic1a chaogeinshift in Lheposted schedules of full-time Police employees with six (6) or more full years of consecutive service is to be mictethe Township may make such shift reassignments with no less than two (2) weeks notice. However the reason nnd lhedecision to make a shift reassignment under this language will not in any wayhe nrbitrnrycapricious or unreasonable and both the reason mdthe decision mny be subject to the partys grievance procedure.

 seeking to use compensatory time must provide forty-eight hours (18)advrmcenotice prior to theuse of such compensatory time to the Chief of Police or his designec. Employees mny only uccumuate a reserve of twenty-four hours (24) of compcns.itory time. Compensatory lime sh3ll be used within sixty (6) days of the dnte thol it wns emed.

Compensatory time not used within the sixty (6) day period shnll be paid according 1 state and federal law.

Section 6.5  Section 6.6  Overtime  Overtime will be allotted to all full-time Police employees with seniority prevailing on a rotating and equal basis. Employees shnll be compensated at a rate of one nnd one half(I ) hours in a workday or forty (4) hours in a workweek. Note Refer lo AAA Case No. SS-39-24-9 issued November 26 199 Myron L. Joseph Arbitrator.

Effective January I 212 Coun Timeshnll be removed from theovet1ime rotation board.

 Overtime Refusal  No employee shall be justified orworrnnted without valid reason to refuse to work overtime onany day when the necessity for such overtime nriscs. To the eiilenttliat overtime nriscs and mullip1e employees nre available to work said overtime lhe employee with the least seniority must acceptthe overtime if employees with gre1tcr seniority arc available.

Section 6.7  Section 6.2  C111Out Compensation  In the event thnt an employee is called out during a nonscheduled wo1kshift 1heemployccstulllbe compcrumtcdat a minimum offour(4) hours atone and one half(l ) times his basesnlaryrateor if the time exceeds four (4) hours the employee shnll be compensated for theadditional time o.tone and one half (1 ) his base saln1yrote for nil additional hours worked. Ex.cept if the hours precede the employees regularly scheduled shift then the employee will only be compensated forthehours actually worked at one and one lrnlf(l ) his base salary rate.

 Cakulnfing  Overtimt  In cilculoting hours worked for the purpose of detennining overtime. all hours worked in execssof eight (8) hours per day and forty (4) per week to include nil men! periods paid vacation layspaid sick days enmcd compensntory time. and time nissclthat is compensated under Heirtmd Lung ncnefits.

Sccrion 6.8  Court Compensation  An employee otherwise not scheduled to work who must attend a hearing before any court or original  Section 6.3  Officer in Chuge (Yorking in a Higher Rrnk)  Vhen a member is perfonning the duties of a higher rank the member shall receive compe1Sation at the rate he would have received had he been promoted to that next higher rank. If a memberworls the majority of hours on n shift ii shall be considered as a whole day at the J1igherronk. When no rank of Sergeant Temporary ActingSergMnt or nbove is involved thcdetennination shall be made according to the Patrolmen with greatest seniority on any regularly scheduled work shift. The Pntrolincn shall be compensated of Sergeants rnte of pay.

 Jurisdiction on the business of the Township shall be compensated at time and one half (1 ) his base salary rate for the time actually spent with a minimum of two (2) hours for an appearance. A minimum of four (4) hours shall be paid nt n time and one hnlf (I ) his bnse salary rate for appearance in ony Slnte or Fcdernl couli unless the time exceeds fot1r(4) hours then the time ond one half (I ) will be paid for actunl hours spent on the business of the Township. There shallbeno lunch plymcnt for court however the Employee shall be pennitted to keep his witness fee. TI1e Township shall continue to pay all applicnble parking expenses.

Section 6.9  Sccrion GA  Cornpcnsntory Time  An employee may elect to toke compensatory time in lieu of overtime. The utilization of compensatory time by an employee shall not cnuse overtime within the Department. An employee  Shift Differential  All full-time Police Employees slmll be paid a differential thirty-cents ($.3) nn hour above their base snhuy for all hours worked within the confines of the period 11 P.M. to 7 A.M.

 Section 7  E. An employee fails to contnct 1heTownship within ten (JO) calendar days andor fails to report b.ick to work within ten ( I) calendardays when recalled from layoffnnd a certified letteris sent 1such employees last known address in an attempt to no1ifyhim of his termination.

 Scnioritv  Seniority is based on the length of continuous service the employee hrrsns n foll-time Police Officer with the Township of South Park Police Depmiment. Seniority shall be occumulotcdduring absence due to illness layoff or permitted leave of absence as long as such seniority is not tenninnted in nccordmce with other provisions of this Agreement.

Section 7.1  Lnyoff Recalls rnd AwnlingJob  J3ids  In oll coses of layoffs recoils and awordingjob bids seniority shall govern if the ability to perfonn the pniticulor job is relatively equal. Employees last hired shall be first laid off provided those employeesremaining are c.ipable of performing tl1eavailable work. The detcmination of the ability of any employee to perfonn the avnilable work shall rest with the Township.subject to the Grievance Procedure in the Abrreement.

 Section  8  Ilolidnvs  The Township shall grnnt to all full-time Police Employees covered by this Agrcemenl eleven ( I I) additional holidays as vacation days with eight hourpay mtl1eirbase snla11rate.The holidaysshall be New Years Dny Memorial Day Veterans Day Independence Day Thanksgiving Day Presidents Dlty Good Friday LnborDay Christmas D2.y Easter Columbus Dny  If any Police Employee works on a designated holiday he will also be paid one and onehalf(I ) hours overtime pay. The Township shall grant to all Junior Pntrolmcn during their first year of service and through their fourth year of service four ( 4) holidays as vacation days with eight (8) hours pay at their base salary rntc. At the sti11of their sixth (61h)year ofseivice ns Regular Full-time Patrolmen 1heysh111l receive the above listed eleven (11) holidays. (AAA No. SS-L-36-21-991  Section 7.2  Probntiou1ry E111ployces  Any new fa11-timcPolice Officer Employee slrnllbe considered probationruy employees for a period of eighteen ( 18) months from the beginning of their employment as regular full-time Police Officer .Employees during which time they hall have no seniority. A probationary employee may be summarilydismissed during such probation.ryperiod nt the sole discretion of the Township. If such employee is retained beyond the probation period he hall immediately therefore be classified as n Junior Patrolman and his seniority shall commence as of the lateof his original employment as a Full-time Police Oflicer.

Section 7.3  Seniority List  1l1e Township will supply the Union with aseniorily list as of January 15th of every calendar year  setling fonh cintesof hire ond job classifications of all Police Employees including the employees addresses and of any employees laid olThired or rehired.

Section 7.4  Grounds for Brcnking Stniorit)  Seniority shall be broken for any of the following reasons  A. An employee qui ls or resigns.

B. An employee is discharged for just cause C. An employee is lnid off for a period longer than twenty-fonr (24) consecutive months.

D. An employee is nbscnl from work due to physical disability for twenty-four (24) consecutive months 1 unless he is absenl due to illness or injury acquired at work snhjecl to an impartinl physicians certification of disobility.

 W) Section 8.1  Person.I Days  Five (5) personnl days will be granted to .ilI Police Employees under this Agreement. All requests for personal dny leaves must be approved by the Chief of Police or his designnte and m1ynot be converted into pay with the exception that an officer may sell back one(l) personal day at the endof each year at the officers regt1larhourly rate of pay with no accrual.

fl1eday should be requested within forty-eight ( 8) hours in advance or up to one (I) hour prior to the shift requested when an unusual circumstance exists ind approval is given by the Chiefof Police or his dcsignce. Once granted the day cmrnot be revoked. No personal days may be taken on designated holictnysexcept when nn unusuil circumstance e.xistsis gven by the Chief of Police or his designate. The procelure for the selectlon ofpersonol days shall be on a fost-come first-serve  basis solely by seniority with no preference to rank. All perSonal day requests can be receivedno cnrlicr than January l . for 1 calendnr year. ff n personal day is granted it must be posted on the schedule wilhin ten (I ) days. Two (2) officers will be permitted to schedule a personal day on the same day excluding holidays provided Ihat any personal day that would create overtime shall be denied al the Townships discretion. In accordance with this section the Township shall grant to Junior P1lrolmenone I) personal day during their first year of service two (2) personal daysduring their second year three (3) personal dnysduring their third yenr four (4) personal days duringrheir fourth year. The progression from one ( I) pe1sonalday per year 1four (4) personnl daysper yearfor Junior Patrolmen sbnll remain in effect and Patrolmen shnll not be eligible for five(5) pc-rsonnldays until tl1cir fifth year of consecutive employment.

 Section 9  Section 9.2  Vacation  All eligible foll-time reguln.rPolice Employee.to include Lieutenaols Sergeants Patrolmen and Junior Patrolmen covered bythisAgrcerncnt shall be entitled to receive 1hcfollowingvacntionswith pay at their base so.loryrate  4 hours  After I yr. but less thon 2 )S.

 5 days  Aflr2 yrs. but less than 5 yrs.

 IO days  8 hours  After 5 yrs. but less thnn 1 yrs.

 15 days  12 hours  After 1 yrs. but less thnn 15 yrs.

 2 days  16 hours  After 15 yrs. but Jess thon 2 yrs.

 25 days  2 hours  After 2 yt.

 3 days  24 hours  Section 9.1  Picking Vocation  Starting November 1sl of the cnlendar year 1 Police Employees eligible for vacation in the coming year shall start to pick their vacations by seniority. Each employee shall have no more than two (2) dnys to s1bmit his vucation request once the employee is afforded his opportunity to pick or the employee shall move to the bouom of the seniority list. All vacation requests must be submitted by December 1st of the clllendnr year and !he Township shall approve and post an npprovedvacntion schedule by December 31st of the calendar year preceding the year in which the vacations are to be taken. Tite Township shnll permit two (2) employees on vacation per day however only one (l) employee per shift excluding Lieutenants and the Chief of Police.

When picking vacation as individual clays the Township shall pennit up to three (3) officers out on vacation as long as it docs not createovc11ime. The decision to pennit the third officer would bent the sole discretion of the Police Chief. If more than one (I )officer requests to be thetbinl officer off on a single vacation r.lny1 thnt clayshall be awarded by seniority with rank prevailing.

The Licutcnmlls shall pick their vacations and holidays nmongst themselves by seniority wlth rank prevailing. Police Employees will pick their vacation days first then go back to pick their holidays.

All picks shall he for an entire shill pass day lo pass day. The first vacation pick will be nmaximum of two (2) complete shifts. The second vacation pick the Employee will be able to make as many vacation picks as he plenses from pass day to pnss day. The third pick will be holiday picks.

Holiday picks will be as many picks ns he pleases from pass day to pass day. Any vacation an Officer is unable to use after it has been picked nnd approved shall be put back up for bid by seniority. All vacation time must be used during thecalendar year for Vhichtime it is allotted except for vncntion buy bnck 1111d vacation cnn-yover pennittcd by this Agreement. The final right to allol vacation and to change such allotments is exclusively reserved to the Township in order to insure orderly operations subject to the tcnns of this Agreement.

 vcaeion Carry Over  Each fuJl.timc Police Employee to include Lieutenants Sergertntsand Patrolmen may nt his sole discretion hcmzy over a totnl of four vocntion days prye.ir into a subequentcnlcndar year or years. At no time may there be any accumulation ofcarryover vacation days in excess of twelve (12) days. Any vacation day carried over into a subsequent yeor must be used within three years from the year in which said date was carried over. The Emp!oyee entilled to cany over days must elect this option on or before December l st of thccalenrlAryear. Junior Patrolmen during theidirst year of service and through their founh year of service are NOT permitted to  carry over vaation days. Al the stnrt of their fifth year of service upon reaching Patrolman Stanis they then shall be entitled to the cury ave( benefit.

Section 9.3  Vncntion Sell Bick  Each full-time Police Employee to include Lieutenants Sergeantsand Patrolmen may. ill his sole discretion sell back to the Township and the Township mu st purchase up to a max.imrnnof five (5) vacation days per year. There shall be no pyramiding of days sold. The sale of such vacation days by the employee to the Township shall be at the rate of one and one lrnlf the employees base salnry rate. All eligible Police Employees wishing to sell bnck vacation days must elect this option before December Isl nnd the Township shall make payment in the first pay period inlamiay. Junior Pntrolmen during their first year of seavicc and through their foutih year of service ore NOT pcnllitted co sell back any vacation days. At the st.in of their fifth ycor of service upon renching Patrolman status they then shall be entitled 1 the .sellbacL.benefits.

Section 9.4  Reduction of Vacation  In the event that an employee with one ( I) or more years of service is nbsent for any reason other than an occupational injury or a plid vncation day or a paid sick day or other poid day off pursuant to this Agreement and is absent for more than forty (4) work dnys his vacation pay will be reduced by one percent (I) for each additional two (2) days the employee is absent after forty (4) work clays.

 Scclion 1 Grievances GH.r !VAN CE PRO CED URE A grievance is a dispute concerning the interpretation npplication or nlleged violation of the specific terms or provisions of this Agreement. Any grievance arising between 11eEmployernnd the Union or an Employee representlIby the Union shall be seltled in the fol lowing manner  STEP ONE -The grievance shall be filed in writing within ten (I ) working days of its occurrence or knowledge of its occurrence. The Officer and the Job Steward shall first discuss the grievance with the Chief of Police. ff the grievance is not resolved to the mutunl satisfaction of the pnrties then the grievance may IJe nppealcd by the Union nndor the Officer within five (5) workdays following receipt of the written response of the Chief of Police in Step One to the Townshio Manager and the Boord of Supervisors.

  STEP TWO TI1e Township Munager and the Board of Supervisors wilhin ten ( I ) workdnys after  receipt of the i1ppenl sho.ll meet with the aggrieved Officer his Job Steward and the Unions Dusincss Agent in nn attempt to adjust the grievance. The Township Monriger and Board of S11pervisorsshnll give the aggrieved Officer and his Job Steward a written decision within tluce(3) workdays following the next regular monthly Supervisors meeting. If the Union does not proceed with Grievance lo Step 111reewithin the time limits mutually agreed upon the grievance sh3l be considered to be satisfactorily resolved.

STEP THRJF. - AlllITRA TION - If the 1Tlevnnce hs not been satisfactorilyresolved at Step Two the Union may appeal lo arbitration within ten (1) cloysnficr a decision at Step Two has been rendered. A request for arbi1rntion may be initiated by the Union serving upon the Town.chip Manager nnd the Botird of Supervisors notice in writi11gof un intent to proceed to nrbitration. The notice shall identify the agreement provisions in dispute the issue(s) to be detennincd nnd the Officer andor Officers involved. Upon receipt of a notice requesting arbitration the parties shall attempt to se!ect an nrbilrator if the parties cannot voluntarily agree upon the selection of an nrbitratorthey shall notify the PA Bureau of Mediatio11of their desire tilnlthe Service submit lo the parties a panel of seven (7) arbitrators. Each party shill a)temntelystrikeuntil one()) name remains.

The Townshipshnll strike the first nnme at the initial grievnneund thereaflerthe initial stdkcslrnll alternate between the Township and the Union. The name remaining shall be the arbitrator.

 A. The arbitrntor shall have no power or authority to add to subtrlctfrom or modify the provisions of th.isAgreement in ll1Tivingnt ll decision on the issue(s) presented nnd shall coufine his decision solely to the application and interpre1ationof this Ag1eement.

B. The cost of arbitration shall be shnrcd equally by the panics (Township find the Unio1).

Each patty shall bear the cost of preparing and presenting its own case.

The grievance mny be withdrawn by the Union or che aggrieved employee ot any time nnd the withdrawal of any grievance shall not be Jrejudicinlto the positions taken by the parties os they rel ate to thnt grievance or nny future grievuncc.

Time limitssclforth in the Grievance Procedure shall unessextendecl by mutual written agreement of the Township and the Uniun be binding nnd any grievancenot timely processed thereafter shall notbenrbitmblc. In the event thnt the Township foils to meet nny of !he deadlines set fot1habove for making a response the Union may move the grievance 1 the netstep ofthe grievance-arbitration procedure. Weekends and holidays do not count.

 The arbitrators decision shall be finol and binding on all parties.

 appropriate union representntivc within forty-eight (48) hours after notice shall have been given to the employee.

The procedures governitlg emergencysuspensions and misconduct complaints erelSoullincd in this agreement. (Refer to Section 36.I 6) A discharged or suspended employee who believes he was suspenderl or discharged for unjust cause must notify the employer in wrilingwithin five (5) coJendirdays after receiving notification of such nctions ogninst him or his desire to appeal the discl1arge or suspension. rnsuch events such grievances shall then be handled in accordance with the grievance procedure set forth in the Agreement starting with Step Two.

 Section12  Snfcty  All marked police vehicles with the exception of n vehicle used prirnnrily by the Chief of Police1 willbe equipped with the state of the art safety features but minimnllymuscbeequippcd with a front interior mounted shotglm or rifle a protective screen scparnting the driver from the rear passenger seat compartment and operational air conditioning.

 Section 13 .Turv Duty Any employee who has been called for jury dutyshll be excused from work for each such day on which he serves or reports to serve a.ndshall be compens81ed by the Township ill his regular base salnry rate however the employee if txcused from jury service before 11 A.M. shall report to work by l  P .M. Any employee receiving notice to report lo jury duty shall immediatelynotifythe Chief of Police. The Township shall reserve the right to request the court to release and relieve any employee from jut) duty.

 Section 14 Bereavement ln case of death in the immediate family four (4) consecutive days wilh pay if st1ch are the employees rcg11lorscheduled workdays will be granted to all full-lime PoliceEmployeesto include Licutcnonts Sergennts Patrolmen nndJunior Patrolmen at their base salary rate. Immediate family is de-finedas Mother Father Children Husband Wife Brother Sister Mother-in-Law Father-in Law Grandparents and Step Children end step Pnrents. (No longer thnn the day afteTthe funeral.) In the evint of the death of an employees Brother-in-Law Sister-in-Law Aunt or Uncle the employee will be granted two (2) days off witl1 base salary rate of pay for his absence if such employees regular scheduled work day.

The intent of the par1iesis to permit employees time off in the event of bereavement withorn loss of rcgulnr pny.

 Section 11 Suspension and Discharge The Township retains the right to suspend nnd discharge any employee for just cause. In al I cases involving discharge or suspension ofnn employee the Township must notify the employee i.nwriting of hi dischnrgc or s1spcnsionmid lhe reuson therefore. Such notice shnll also be given to the  II  12  Section 15  Hospitnlization  Section 15.3 Physicim Visits and Prescription Co-Pays  nnd Mcclicnl Benefits  The Township asrees to provide the following hospitulizntion and medicnl fosurnnce coverace for al I full-time Police Employees to include Lieutenants Sergeants. and Palrolmen Andtheir dependents.

Health care contributions for all police officers will be onennd Urec-qunrterpcrcent(1.751)ofbase wages each yeM for the length of this Agreement.

 The Township nnd the Union llgrec tlintpayment of co-pays requiredby the Pinnincludingthose for physician visits or prescriptions sh11be the responsibility of the employee.

Section 16 Additional  Insnrnnccs  The Township agrees to provide and pay the premium for the following insurance covcrge for all full-time Police Employees  Section 15. l Benefit Coverage  A. The health care benefits will be provided tlu-oughthe Commtmily Blue Flex Pinn Benefits with the Vestem PA Teamsters and Employers Welfare Fund. Administrition will be coveredunder 1hc same tenns as above otherwise this bargaining unit will remain in the current medical coverage plan. The current Summary of Benefits me !isled at end of this grecmcnt.

 D. 1-lighmarkB111e CrossBlue Shield High Option Dental Family Plan.

 A. Fnlse Arrest Insurance B. Life Insurance dt1ringemployment  $3.

$ 5.

 Section 17 Insurance Benefits Into Retirement The Township agrees to provide and pay for the following insumncc covertge for rtlircd Police  C. Vision Benefits of America Optical Plan.

 Employees  D. Tri-Comnrnnity South EMS nmbulnncc service muninl fee.

 A. Paid up Life lnsurnncc at Retirement  E. Medical In-Lie ofPavment. Any full-lime officer eligible for cost free hospitalization coverage  B. Police Employees retired on or berore December 31 199 fifty percent (5) of the premiums for all retired employees for the hospitnlizntion and medical insnrnnce coverage for said employees for the Dine CrossDlue Shield three-hundred sixty-five (365) day Plan U or its equivalent.

 elsewhere sholl be paid n medical in-liC11of payment of two thousand five hundred ($25.) dollnrs e!chyear of the Agreement in which the coverage is waived. Proofofnltemate coverage must be provided to the Township in order to qualify for said payment.

 This complies with AAA File No. 55-39-218-93 of Fcbniry 18 I99-1Car F. Stoltenberg Arbitrator.

Section 15.2 Substitulion of Eqnnl Plans  The Township may cJ1angcmedical plans nnclor catTiers to compnrable covcrnge. Compnrnblc coverage docs not mean identic11 coverage and moy include  i  different plan design for different  hospitals and doctors. The Township will nolify the Union ofits intent to explore other options and kc.ep the Union infonned of the steps being taken. Bargaining unit members shall cooperate in completingquestionnairesor providingmedical infonnalion to m1derwritersnnd corrierswithinthe prescribed time periods. Such individual medical infonnotion shall not be provided to theTownship.

lfthe Township becomes subject to the ACAs Cadillac Tn-cthe pariies agree rhac the Township  shall 1rnvethe right to reopen the contract 1 negotiate andor arbitrnte similnrcompnrnblc Health Pinn chnnges or other remedies to address or eliminate said tax liability. The arbitration process in such an event shnll be in o.ccordance with the grievnnce process ns outlined in Section 1 -  Grievnnces.

 13  $5.

 C. Police Employees retired on or after .lnnunry l 1991 !hallreceive lWo hundred ond fifty ($25.) dollars monthly toward the premimn for this group rntc for insurunce coverage commensurate with that in effect for employees on active duty. Such benefit shal I only be vailablcfrrclir employees and only in the event and to theextentthat comparable coverage 1s not provided without cost from another source. Jn the event cost-free coverage is available from another source nnd nt some pointbecomes unavailable the Township shall resume the two hundred and fifty (S25.)dollar per month poyment toward the Townships group rote. At no time shall this retired insurance payment he mnde lo the retired officer however if the retired officer has insurance coverage from nnother inst1rancecnn-ierother thnn the Townships carrier and is paying for the insurance himself the retired officer can mnkc arrangements for the Township lo moke the two hundred and fifty ($25.) dollar monthly payment to the carrier of his choice as long as it is not a can-ier thnt he is receiving cost-free coverage from. The two hundred and fifty ($25.) dollar monthly insurance supplement shall be terminated upon the employee reaching the age of sixty-five ( 65). The Union wants to make clear nnd certain that it is understood that retired insurance coverage is only requested nnd negotiated for in order 1 issist the retired employee to live with dignity and protection. The monthly two hundred and fifty (S25) dollars townrd insur.ince is not intended to supplement the pension if there is 11 insurance coverage it is only requested if coverage thnt is n cost to l11crelind employee is in effect.

 14  Police Employees retired on or rifler Jtnuary 11 215 shull receive three hundred ($3.) dollars monthly toword the premium for the group rate for insurance coverage commensurate with that in effect for employees on active duty.

Employees hired after Jnnuary 1 212 shnll not be eligible for the post-retirement health care benefit.

Section  18 Ulsnbilily  Income Protection  The Township agrees to provide and maintain a program of disability income protection to all eligible employees subject to this Agreement. Said prognm will provide benefits to the employee effective the 31st day after the occurrence of n non-occupation.o.l occidental bodily injury or sickness and results in 1he inability of the employee to engage in his occupalion as a Police Officer. The benefits paid to such ernployec shall equll fifty percent (5) of the rcspctivc employees gross monthlysilnry computed on said employees base salary. Said disability payment shall becipped nt thirty-six. (36) months.

Section 18.1 Oisibility Income md Sociil Security Should nn employee be iigible for any social security benefits lhe disability payments recited in Section 18 shall be reduced to the extent that the total benefits obtained by the employee through social securitypnyments and disability incomepnyments shnll not exceed seven1ypercent (7) of the employees gross 111onlhlysalary calcu!atcdon the employees base salary mte in existence nt snid time.

Section 18.2 Disability Income and Sid Leave An employee sholl not be required to use Rny nccumulatcd sick leave dnys ifhe qualifies for or receives any payments pursuant to the disability income protection insurance but said employee may elect to do so nt which time any disability payments made to the employee during such tiin.eas the employee receives his b3se salary rnte os a result oftl1e use of his sick leave will be paid over to the Township.

Section 18.3 Disability Income Payments NtAmount Any payments midepursuant to the disability income protection shall be a Net Amount paid to the employee and shall not be subject to withholding except as recited in Section 18.1 herein.

 Section 18.5  B. Vhen fl member is on sick leave as a result of an off-duty injury he shall not engage in any outside employment.

C. Wlten an injured member is able lo relum to duly he shall first be examined by a physician who will confirm the members ability to return to duty.

 D. ltealtbcare shall be limi1edfor non-work related injuries to lhirty-six (36) months.

Section  19 Loss of Insurance  Disability lncornc aml Insurance Coverage  Any employee receiving rlisability income p1yi.11cnt aprovided for herein. shall nevertheless retain all other insurance coverage provided for in this ngreement to any other Employee.

 IS  Covcrn!!e  In case of nn employees o.bsenccfrom work due to lay-off or leave of absence other than occupational injt1ry or non-occnpntional occident injury or sickness the Township sha.11not be oblignted lo 1ayfor any insurance coverage for such employee beyond the end nfthemonth in which such absence begins AJhensuch employee returns lo work nll insurance coverage for said employee will recommence ns of the first of the month following said employees return ro work.

Section  2 Pension Emplovee Coutributlons  No pension contribution shnll be required of bargaining unit members unless Act 25 Actuarial Srudydemonstrates the necessity for such contribution either to maintainthe nctuary status of1he plan1 or to cover an increase in the MMO results from an improvement in benefit stmcn1re. ff contributions become necessary tllc percentage lt!velof such contributions shall be the mininuun necessary to meet Act 25 and Act 6 requirementsond in nnycvent 1 they shall not exceed thelevel .uthorized by Act 6. (This is in compliance with AAA File No. 55-39-218-93 Febmnry I 8 1994 Carl f. Stoltenberg Arbitrator.) Pensions shall be calculated on the base wage ofoll policeofficers hired on or after fanunry 1218.

The ten (1) year certain provision oullined in the police pension plan document will be eliminated to comply with state law with lhe exception of officers who are eligible for the benefiLas of December 31 217.

 Section 2.1 Section 18.4  Off Duty Injury  A. In the event thot a member of this department is injured while ln 11noff-dutystah1s1 and lhe injury requires hospitalization or extensive meclic.ltreatment the member shall notify the Chief of Police or the offidal then in charge.

 Pension Culculn.tions mdPayme-nts  Upon retirement provided thnt the minimum required senrlcc has been attained an employee shall receive fifiy percent (5) of his average monthly salary including ovenime and longevity computed on the last thiny-six (36) months of service.

 16  Scclion 2.2  Pension nnt1 SociilSecurity  Section 21.l  Ench employee shall contribute to social security by way of withholding and the Tovmship shall contribute its employer contribution to social security so that each employee shall be eligible to collect social security payments upon reaching the required age for payment of social security benefils.

Seclion 2.3 Pension ond Socio! Security Offscllntegratlon A zero perc.ent() offsetintegration factorofsociil security benefits is t1ppliedwilhrelation to the benefits pnid pursuant to the Pension Plan. There shall be no offset or reduction in pension benefits payable 1the employee by virtue oflhe payment of social security benefits.

 Sicl Lcnve Benefits  All Current full.time Police Employccsinclucling Lieutenants Sergennts and Patrolmen receive seventeen ( 17) workdays in each calendnt year as sick leave. All sick lellve dnys shall be appliedon a workdi.ybasis.

All Jm1ior Patrolmen shnll receive five (5) workdays in the caendar yei.l.r starting tlteir firtyenr of servicemd through fourth year of service however upon 1hesti.l.rtoftheirfifthyenrof servicewhen reaching Patrolmen status theyshall receive the snme sick leave benefits as all other full-timePolice employees.

Section 21.2 Sick Leave Notificttion  Section 2.4  Vidow 1 s Pension  The widow of any employee sholl receive 11Vldows Pension ns said term is defined in the existing pension program to the extent of fifiy percent (5o) of the pension that would otherwise be pnynble to theretired employee. Said benefits shall contain a provision for an election to hnve i tenye.1r guaranteedpayout of benefits which is iniended to benefit the spouse of retired married employees.

(This section has been amended lo comply with Pennsylvania Act 3 signed into law on April 17 23 and Amens ACI 6.)  Employees shall notify their imrnet.liatesupecvisor or the Officer In Charge of the previous shift ut least one ( I) hour prior to commencementof the employees regular shift that said cmploytewil be on sick leave.

Section 21.3 Sick Lewe Doctors Certificate Employees. who are on sick leave for four (4) or more consecutive work days shall be regt1iredto submit n doctors certificnte upon 1-etumingto work snid ccrtificntc must rilso indic.tte that the employee is able to ren1m to work without ony limitations.

 Section 2.5 Pension Service Increments  An employee who has bTenterlhi.l.n twenty-five (25) years of service with the Township ns n fulltime Police Employce 1 shall be entitled to nlditionalpension increments of two hundred clollars (S2.) per month commencing with the complc1ionof the twcnty-si.xlh(26) year of service.

Section 2.6 rension Vesting  Employeeswilh twelve ( 12)ycllrsof services hall be doemed 1have vested in the Pension Progrm.

Section 2.7 Pension Bonrd The Township agrees tho! !here shall be formed a five (5) member Pension Board of which one (I) member shnll be an nctivc Police Officer with voting rights. This bonrd sh11meet ori the lccond Tuesdayof1he following monlhs of each calendar year January April July and October. The Pcnsion Board shall be responsible to review investigate md recommend the best possible investment policy of the South Pork Township Police Pension Fund so thnt to the greatest extent possible the maximum benefits uremade available to nil employees covered by this agreement and covered by the Pension Fund. A detailed report shall be made available 1 any and all employees with an interest in the fund within fourteen (14) co1cndardnys nfier the Pension Board meetings.

 Section 21.4  Sick Leave Accumul.1tion  All full time Police emplOCCSshall be pennitted to accumuh1tc 13 sick days to lheir date of retirement. Any sick lenve dny accunmlatelabove the specified number may be credited to nn escrow account in accordnnce with section 21.9 or sold to the Townsl1ip at role of SOof the employees base salary rate for that year. By December 2th of ench calendar yeor every employee with sick days above the maximum accumulation shnll report to 1heTownship their intentionsof placing the excess dnys into escrow account rmdorthe retum of the excess sick laysto the Township for payment. Any payment due to the employee will be made in !he first pay period of lhe .succeedingyear. lfno indicalion is mdcby the employee as to the option desired all accumul2tions wilJ be plnced in an escrow account in accordance with Section 21.9.

 Section 21.5 Sicl Letle Use of for other thn Employee Sickness An employee to accommodate malemily needs and other sctious illness iindemergency sihmtions occmring in his immediate family will use the following with the expressed approvalof theChiefof Police A. First the employee must use any accumulated compensnto1y time.

 Section 21 Sick Leave Definition  B. 1nthe absence of compensatory time or if additional time is needed vacation time will be used.

 Tl1eTownship and the Union understand ind ngrccthat sick leave is a benefit canied by seniceand is nvnil3hlewhen nnd if needed onlshall not be n risht oftnkins such a.svncntion.

 18 17  C. Third ifinsufficient vacation days arenvailable. Perso11.nl days will be used.

D. If nil of the nbove are exhausted then sick leave may be used.

E. Last if nll oflhe above are c.xhaustethen!Se of sick day escrow nccumulationmay be used in accordance with Section 21.9.

Section 21.G Sick Leave Upon Retirement Upon rel iremcnt. an employee sh.ill be reimbursed for each and every accumulatedsick leave day which has been unused nt 1hernte of sixtypercent (6) of the snid employees thenbase salaiyrnte.

ln the event that a.Police Officer dies prior to retirement the accumulated sick leave based upon foregoing fonnnla shall be paid to the designated beneficiary of such Police Officer.

Section 21.7  Sick Leave Bonus  An employee who does not take a sick leave day rturing uny consecutive one hundred eighHwo (182) day period (counting oil dnys whether worked or not but excluding the period in which the employee shall hnve been on diso.bilityresulting from n non-occupationnl accidental injury or sickness) sh oil be paid tJ1eequi vnlent of eight (8) hours of his then base snfaryrate. Said additional compensn1ionsluill be paid to the employee in the next regu Jar pay subsequent to the completion of one hundred eighty-two (182) dny period.

Section 21.8 Sick Leave Reduction 1n the event an employee with one (I) or more years of service is ahsent for nny reason he shall be eligible for sick leuve benefils so long ns the absence is Jess than forty (4) workdays in any given  calenderycftr. If1he absence is in excess of fony (4) workdays and is for any reason other than occupational injuryssick leave benefits will be reduced one percent (I) for each two (2) additionol workdnys tlrnt the em1loyeei!i absent. Absencefor purposes of this section sl1allnor inclllde any paid sick days paid vacntion days or any other paid days off pursunnl to lhe tenns of the Agreement.

Section 21.9  Sick Leave Escrow Account  All full time Police Employees shall be pennitted to accumuki.tesick leave days over one hundred and thirty (13) days in nn account set up for the employee. These sick leave days in escrow will be availoble to the employee ns sick leuve if requested by the employcennd approved by the Board of Supervisorsof the Township. Approval oft he Board of Supenrisorsis discretionaryandshall onlybe given in unusunl circt1111stances.

Section 22  Uniform  Allownncc  Maintenance  nnd Firearms  The Township will establish a Quartennaster System for the replacement of unifoms. The Township shall appoint a Quartennasterwhom would allow each full-time employeeto replace his unifonn if approved by the Qunrtcnnaster in nccordancewith thcunifonn specificntionsestablished for the Union Each employee would be allowed to rcplaceunifonns to a maximumofsix hundred 19  ($6(l.) dollrusper employeeper yenr.Al I cq11ipme11t snd unifonns pmchnsedshullbe made from t  TownshipRnpprovedvendor.

 Effective this date herein the Township has agreed to purcbnse a bulletproof vest for all Police cfficerswho desire to wenr one. Replnccments of vests will be one of systematicpurchase schedule retained by the Chief of Police whereby the replacement will be basedon the manufacturers warranty oncVoraccidentaldamage. All Police Employees hired hereina.flcrshall be supplied n fnJl complement ofunifonns (winter nnlsummer) ns pprovedby the Township. Theyenrin whichthe employee is hired mdyear after his doteof hire the employee wouldnot be eligible for replacement of unifonns as through the qunrtennnstersystem except lo replice uniformsdamoged in the line of duty.

The Township shall purchase and provide 1 11employees an appropriate fireann based on the recommendation of the fireonns officer and in nccorclnncewith n troiningprogram 11pproved by the Bord of Supervisors and recommended by the Fircanns Officer. All Police Employeesslrnll be issued and trained with an appropriate fireann. South Park Township shall retain the ownership of lltt pistols that tl1eypurchnsc.

Section 23  Trnvel Allowance  A 11employees required to use their persona1vehicle or publictrnnspo11a1ion to travelon businessof the Township will be reimhursed nt the rate approved by the Internal Revenue Serviceper mile and parking costs. whereapplicoblein case of the use uf their personal Vel1iceor will be reimbursedthe cost of public transportation.

Seel ion 24  Eclucntlonnl Police Trnining  Any employee wishing to vohmtarily nttend any school or training progr.1mto forthcr his police cnreer may do so but only with the expressed written m1thorizationof tl1cChief of Police and the Townsbip Manager in accordancewilh the policy set forth by the Board ofSupeniisors. The Baud of Supervisors is lhe sole and exclusive discretion may authorize payment or reimbursementto the employee for the costs for nttending such school or truining program. Whennnyemployee is either directed or given permission to attend any school or training program 1hehours and the days wherein sriid employee is attending Slchciasses or programs shall be construedas hoursworkedand the employee shall be paid his base snlary nite. In addition thereto said employee shnll be compensated for travel e.wenses in nccordancc with Section 23 and compensatedsix ($6.) dollars for lunch if said class or training program required morning and oficmoon attendance.

Seclion 25  Edueational  Incentive Pav  Each employee awarded a degree from an accredited college or universitywill be paid the following additional compensation paymentof 1hisstipend shall be made on or before December31st of each calendar year.

 2  A. Associate Degree  B. Bachelors Degree C Masters Degree  $2. annually $3. annually $5. annually  fn nddition the Township is offering none thousand dollar ($1) one-time bonus for members who re awarded nn Associntes Degree after the effective dnte of this contrnct (Jmuary 1 I 997) from nn accredited college in rell1tedsubjects.

 Section 26  l. Chief of Police who will notify nll other top officials 2. Members next of kin E. Vhen a disabled member is -i.ble to retum to duty. he shall first beexmnined by a physician wl1 will confinn the members ability to rerum to active duty.

F. In no event shaJI a member who is on sick leavens a result ofan on-duty injury and receiving compensation from the Township engage in imy outside employmentor participate in .sportsOJ strenuous work (hat may imp11iror jcopnrdize recovery from the original injury.

 Nondiscriminntion  Neither the Township nor the Associate shnll discriminate ngainst any employee for employment covered by this Agreementon account ofrace sex color religious creed nationalorigin or nge. The use of the m.2.legender of nouns or prnouns in this agreement is not intended to describe any specific employee or group of employees but is intended to refer 1nll employees regardless of sex.

 Section 27.2 Exposure to Communicnblc Disenses In the event that a member while in the pcrfonnanceofhis official dutie.comes in contact with any person who has n known or suspected communicable diseasc1 the member shall immedinrely be transported to the nearest hospital for medical treatment. After trct1.tmentthe member shall !hen complete an incident report listing the incident ns contact with communicable disease.

 Section 27 Occupational lnjurv Workers Compensation When the Township and nn Officer ngrcc that the officer was iujmed md is temporarily totally disabled due to wori-rela1ed nccident or illness the Officer shall seeknnybenefits offered 1hrough the Townships workers compensotion ca1Tier.Monies payable to the Officer from thiscarriershall be endorScd mcr to 1heTownship which will provide all of the benefits available to officers under Pennsylvania Heai1 and Lung Act. Any disputes regnrding entitlcmentlo leort and Lung Act benefils will be subject 1 the Grievance Procedtire. Resolutions of rhese disputes through the Grievance Procedure is not to be based upon the Just cause sta1dardbut is to be based upon the standard established by Pennsylvani.1Appdlatc Case Law interpreting the Heart nnd Lung Act.

 Section 27.J  Section 28  Unemployment Com1ensntion  The employer agrees to make the required contributions to the UnemplomentCompensation fundof the Commonwenlth of PennsylvaniatO cover all employees under this Agreement for benefits under the Petmsylvania Unemployment Compensnlion Law.

 Section 29 Police ornccrs  Bill of Rights  A. When an anonymous complain! is made g1ins1a Police Officer and nocorroborntive evidenceis obtained the complaint shall be classified as unfounded.

 On )uty Injury  A. Any member of thi depanment who in the course of performing his official duties injures himself shrill immedfatcly notify the official in charge. The member shnll then complete an incident report listing the incident as Injured Employee. Thernembershall provide the detailed fncts surrounding the injury. In the event the member is unable.to complete an incident repor1 due to hospitalization or other circumstances it slrnll lhen be the responsibilityof the Officer in Charge to complete the incident report.

 B. When a memberofthisdepartment required medical attentionasa resultof an on-dutyinjuryhe  shall be 1ransportedlo a hospital.

C. When a member is injured but does nol require hospitalization and is capable of perfonning his duties the member shrill ret11rnto duty nfter seeking medical lreatment as soon as 11ossible.

o. The below listed notification slrnll be made by the Officer in Charge any time a member is seriously injured andor hospitalized  21  B. When any citizen complnint is filed greater thnn ninety (9) cnlendar days after lhe dnte of tlic alleged event complained of which if tn1e could 111leac1ro criminnl charges such complaint shull be classified as unfounded and the nccused employee shnll not be required to submit a written repor1 bm sha.11be notified orally or in writing of such cloim.

C. A Police Officer whether a subject or witness must be infonncd of the nature of the  interrogation at the oulSC(of 1heinterrogntion.

D. If the intenogated Police Officer writes n statement a transcript is tikenor mechanical record mnde a copy of same musl be given to the interrogated Police Officer wi1hout cost upon request.

E. If any Police Officer under interrogntion is under arrest or is likely to be placed under arrest ns a result of the interrogation he shall be completely infonned of 211his rights prior to 1he commencement of the interrogation.

 22  F. At the rcqucsr of nny 1Jiccofficer under interrogation he shall have Uteright lo be represented by the Union representative who shall he present at nil times during the interrogation. The inte1Togtionshall be suspended for a reasonable time until representation can be obtnined.

 Section 33 Military Leave Within twenty.four (24) hours after receiving orders members requiring military leave for annual training shnll notify the Chief of Police of their need for military leave and 1heinclusive dntes. A copy of 1nilitary orders will be supplied to the Chief of Police prior to leave.

 O. Unless agreed to by the officer thTownship shall not make any public cormncnl on !he renson for any disciplinmy nction brought against nny officer.

 Section 34 Gcnernl Conduct ofl1cmllei-s  Section 3 Gencrnl Provisions  Members of this depar1ment shall conduct their public and privale affairs ina manner that is bC)Ond reproach mrl shnll not be a discredit ro themselves or this department.

 T!Jis Agreement is ubjcctin all respects lo thelnwsof the Commonwealth of Pennsylv1nin.with respect 1 the powers rights duties. and obligations of the Township Union o.ndEmployees in the Bnrgaining Unit. Further this Agreement is subject to nny and nil of the provisions of UteSecond Class Township Code and the Code of Ordinances oflhe Township of South Park ns the same relates to Police employees.

 Section 31 Separabilitv  and Savings Cliuse  If nny m1icle or section of this agreement should be held invalid by operations of law or by any tribunal of competent jurisdiction or if compliance with or enforcement of any section should be restrained by such hibunul pending a final determination as to its validity the remainder of this agreement or the application of such section to persons or circumstnnccsother than those as to which it hns been held invalid or ns to which compliance with or enforcement of foisbeen restricted ns above set for1h the parties affected thereby shall enter into immaliatc collective bargaining negotiations 1 ttpon the request of the Union or the Township for the purpose ofa11ivir1gatam11mally satisf.-ictoryreplacement either party may request 1hatthe matter be arbitrnted under some lcrms of Section 1.

 Section 32  Functions and Duties of Police Depnrtment  A. The primary and foremost flnc1ionof this deportment is to snfeguord the lives and protect lhe property of all persons within the boundaries of !he Township of Soulh Pork. Thisdcpmtment is responsible for the preservntion of public peace the enforcen1ent of the laws smrutcs and ordinances of the United Stoles Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Township of South Park. The apprehension ofvioJators of those lnws sranttes and ordinances nnd the mtintennnce of safe and orderly flow a f velticle traffic and pedestrians on public thorolghfares.

D. Members of this department shall possess and exercise full police authority on J1ndwater and nir within the territorial boundaries of the Township of South Park except  Section 34.1  Obedience to Laws  No member of this deputment sh.ill willfully violnte ony federal stnte or local h.w srntnte or ordinance.

 Section 34.2 Courtesy Members of this dep811mcnt shall be courteous lo the public. Members shell be tactful in petfom1ance of their duties shall control their behavior and exercise the utmost patience And discretion and shnll not eng3.gein nrgumentatlvcdiscussionseven in the face of extreme provocation.

In the perfonnance of their duties officers shall not use course violent profimeor insolent language or gestures und shall not express myprejudice conceming race religion politics national origin.

lifestyle or similar personal charac1crislics. In theperfonnM1ceoftheirdntics officersmust maintain a 11cutraland detoclted nttituclcwithoutindicatingdisinlerest ortl1at a malteris pettyorinsignificant including verbiage used in rndio transmission.

Section 34.3  Reporting for Duty  Members of this departmenl shall re-portfor duty at the time a.ndplace required by assignment or orders and shall be physicolly mclmentolly tit to perfonn their duties. They slinll be properly equipped and cognizant of their infonnation required for the proper perforniance of duty so thtthcy 1nny immedintcly assume their duties. Judicinl Subpoenas and District Court Notification shall constitute nn order to report for duty under this section.

Section 34.4 Derog1tory Lang1rnge Members of this deparlment shall not resort to the use of nny curse profane or insulting language townrd the general pl1blic.

Section 34.S Use of Alcohol on Duty  I.

 2.

 on land water and air owned andor occupied by the United States Govemment for militruy postal or other purposes ns limited by npplicnblc law.

 23  A. Members of this dep111mentshalt not consume intoxicnting beverages while in uniform oron duty except in the perfonnance of plninclothes investigative dmy and while acting under proper and specific orders from an official.

 24  D. Members of this depu1ment shall not appear for duly or be on duty while under the influence of intoxicants to any degree whntsocver or with an odor of intoxicants on their breath.

Seel ion 34.6  It is the policy of this department that no member shall engge in o Iocnlstate or fedeml political activity ns a representntiveof this department.

 Poucssion and Use of Drugs  No member or civilinn employee of thi!Idepar1mentshall possess or use any controlled subslancc.

narcotic or hnllucinogen except when prescribed by n physician for an illness or injury. Officer or civiliims experiencing adverse physic11or emotional c!Teclsfrom any prescribed medication should notify lhe surcrvising official in chnrgc immediately.

Section 34.7  Sleeping on Duty  No member of this department shall sleep while on a tour of duty.

Section 34.8  Gambling  Personnl Appearncc  A. Members of this depirtment while on duty shnll we.r unifonns or other clothing in accordance  with established dep.111mcntalprocedures.

B. Except when acting u11derproper and specific orders from i superior officer officers on duty shall mnintnin 1 neat well-groomed appearance and s11llstyle their hair according to the following guidelines 1.

 2.

3.

4.

 A. Officers sholl be pennitted lo  I.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

 7.

 No member of this department shnll cngige in any game of chance card playing or snmblingwhile on duty lnless authorized to do so in the perfonnance of official res.ponsibilities.

Section 34.9  Section 34.11 Employee Pnrticipotion and Polilicnl Activity  Hair must be clean 11eJt and combed. Hnir shall not beworn longer than the  top of the shirr collar ot the bnck of the neck whe11standing with the head at normal posture. The bulk or length of the hair shall not interfere with the nonnnl wcnring of all standnrd heod gear.

Wigs or hairpieces are permitted if they confonn to the above standards for natural hnir.

Sidcbum- shall be nc.lllytrimmed and rectangulor in shnpc and shall not be lower than the car Jobe.

Officers shall be clean-shaven except thrit they HU 1rn.vemustaches which shall be neatly trimmed.

 Section 34. 1 Unions Members of this department sha11avoid regulnror continuous associations or dealings with persons whom they know or should know. are persons l.mdercriminal investigation or indiclment or have a reputation in the community or the department or present involvement in felonious or criminal behavior except ns necessnry for the pertbminncc of official dutiecor where mnvoidnblebec.i.use of 1hcpersonal relationships of the officers  register and vote in any election attend poli1icalconventions rallies fond raising functions actively engage in any non-partisan political functions sign political petitions ns individuals make financial contribt1tions to political orgnnizations hold membership in n politict1lpa11ynnd pnr1icipatein ils functions to the extcnl consistent with section 94 and 95 of August 5 1941 PL752 as amended. containi11gprovisionsgovemingpoliticnl activitymd .5.!Sessments otherwise p.irticipntcfully in public affnirs except os provided by law 1 the extent rhat such endeavors do not impair a neutral md efficient pcrfomunce of official duties or crente renl or appnrent conflict of interest  B. Officers arc prohibited from 1.

using their officiAIcapaci1y to influence interfere with oraITect the result of .in election 2.

nssuming active roles in the management organization or financial activi1ies of partisan poiticnl pai1ies campaigns or clubs l.

serving as officers of partisan political parties or clubs 4.

becoming cnndidntes for or c-Jmpaigningfor partisan elected public office 5.

soliciting votes in support of or in opposition to nny pmtisan candidatesiSS1es 6.

serving as delegales ton political party convention 7.

initinting or circulnting a pat1isnn nomination petition 8.

organizing selling tickets to or o.ctively participating in a fund raising function for a pirtisan political part or candidntc 9.

otherwise enguging in prohibitive partisan activities as set forth in lhe State Civil Service Act Stction 34.12 Smoking nnd Tobncco  uc  Members of this departmentall sworn and civilirm personnel are prohibited from the use of lobaco products while in the police building.indor in the police cars. This policy will also include while in the perfonnance of your police duties.

A. Smoking MCI may be designated by the Chief of Police by a departmental order.

 26 25  J.

 Violation of any written rule regulntion or procedures of the mnualse1 forth by tlle Chief of Police or Board of Supervisors  in the presence of others.

 4.

 Violallon ofnny law of the Commonwctlth of Pennsylvania which provides that such violation constitutesn felony  A member or employee shnll render the pmper respect to superior officers. TI1euse of indecent profane insolent or uncivil language to superiors by any member or employee is prohibited.

 5.

 Tnefficiencyneglect intemperance disobedience of orders or conduct unbecoming an officer  6.

 I ntoxicatio1l while on duty  7.

 Willful misstati-mentfolsification or concealment on application  Section 34.13 Conduct Tow!lrds Superior Officen  A member or c1nployccshnll address superior officers by title or rnnk at all times while on duty and  A member or employee shall not under any circumstances criticize nr speak degradingly to other  members of his dcparrment or to persons outside oft he department regarding instnictions orders or actions issued or pc1fonmd by a st1perior officer.

No member or cmployeesh1llbe insubordinnte to any superior officer orsuptrvisorortoonein duly constituted authority.

A member or employee shalt be considered insubordinate when he is unwillingto submit to authority or willfully disobedient to ln order lawfully issued by n superior officer or one in duly constituted authority or uses anydisrcspectfitl mutinous insolent or abusive language towardso supriorofficer or supeniisor or one in duly constituted authority.

 A. Any time an officer faces disciplinary action except for .an oral ruuUora written reprimanhe  shat I receiven depnrtmcn1alhearing before the Chief of Policeand the Township Monaeerlnlor the Assistant Township Monogcr to establish any further aclion.

Note An offlcer under review must hnve a union representative presentat the hearing.

8. No persons employed by the Police Deparlmenl Shilllbes-uspcndedremoved or reduced in mnk on account of race sex color religious creed .1geMtional origin or political reasons.

 Section 34.14 Viobtion of Rules nnd Conduct A violation of any of the rules of conduct contni11cdin this section or any other section of this mnnual shnll be sufficient cause for disciplinary action to be taken by lhe Chief of Police in  accordimce with tllc niles anclregnlations of the Policy md Procedure Mom1alof the Township of South Park. Disciplinary action may constitute the following I . oral reprimand 2. written reprimnnd 3. internal suspension 4. external Sttspension 5. extended probation 6. reduction in rank 7. dismissal from the depa11mcnt  C. TI1eChief of Poliee or in the absence of the Chief the Deputy Chief of the Police Department may suspend an employee in the Police Department for o period not to exceed thirty (JO) working days. The Chief of Police or the Deputy Chief of the Police Department may recom111eul lo the Board ofSupervisors 1 suspension of employees in the Police Dcpanmtntfor periods in excess ofthi1y (3) days nnd may nlso recommend reduction in rank or rcmovol.

All disputes between the parties regarding the intcrpretotion or applications ofthc provisions of this manual shall be settled in accordnnce with the Grievance P1occdure set fonh in agreement between the Township of Smith Park nnd the Union.

Section 34.16 Procedures Governing Eme1gcncy Suspensions and l1isconduct Complaint  Section 3-tJS Removals No persons employed by UeSouth Park Township Police Department shall be suspended removed or reduced in ronk except for the following reasons  The following personnel have lhe authority to impose emergency suspension until the nex.tbusiness day ngainst i. member or employee when it appears that such action is ln the best interest of the deparlment J.

 I.

 Physical or mental disi.bilityafiecting his obility to continue in cn ice in which case the person shall receive an honornblc discharge from the service  2.

 Neglect or violation ofan officinl duty  1  27  2.

3.

4.

5.

 Any commanding officer ns defined herein Chief Deputy Chief Lieutenant Sergcnnt (concurre11cewiththe Chief of Police or Deputy Chief in the nbsenceofthe Chic() 28  6.

 Temporary Acting Sergeant (concurrence with the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief in the rtbsencc of Chief)  7.

 OlC Patrolmen (concurrence with the Chief of Police or Deputy Chief in the absence of the Clief)  A menJber or employer.receiving emergency st1spcnsionshall be required to report lo the Chief of Police on the next business day at 9 A.M. unless othenvise directed by competent outhority.

The command or supervisory officer imposing or recommending the suspension shall also report to the Chief of Police nt the same time.

Vhenevcrdisciplinnry .1ctionis taken or recommended (except for ornl reprimand) a written report must be subrniltec.limmediotcly containing 1hefollowing infonnition I. The name. rank nnd present nssignment oflhe person being disciplined.

 2.

3.

4.

5.

 TJ1cdats times and locations of the misconduct.

A complete statement of the faces of this misconduct.

TI1epunishment imposed or recommended.

The writlen signuure ond rnnk of the preparing officer.

 The report shall be distributed as follows by the officer imposing or recommending disciplinlry action  If in the opinion of the Officer in Charge the incident is of sufficien1gravi1yhe shall notify the Chief of Police regardless of the hour. In addition he shall take nny immediate action necessary to preserve the integrity of the department until the cirrivAIof the Chief.

TI1eofficer assigned the investigation of an alleged act of misconduct on the paL1of a member or nn employee of this depnrtmenl shall conduct a thorough nnd accurate investigation. Such investigation shall include fonnnl statements from all pnrties concerned w1ennecessary and pertinent the gathering and preservation ofmy physicul evidence pertaining lo the case nnd all other i11fom1ation bearing on the maner. Alleged am of misconduct must be invcstigntelond the results of the i11vcstigationmust be reduced to l written report ln conjunction with the current police contract.

The invcsligatingofficer shall sum1narize the pertinent focls including I.

2.

3.

4.

5.

 6.

7.

8.

 I. Original to the Chief of Police  2. Boord of Supervisors 3. Manager 4. Copy retained by officer imposing or recommending the nction 5. The oppropriate Union Reprcsentlltive The member or employee being disciplined shall be infomHdof the ch1rgesand penalties assigned nt the ti.me such aclion is taken. Vnencvcr any command or supervisory officer observed or is informed of the misconduct of any other member or employee which indicates the nccU for disciplinary action he shall take authorized and necessary action and render a complete report ofthc incident and his 1ctionsto his contmflnding officer.

 Complaintsby citizens againstmembersor employeesof this departmentshallbe processed in the  9.

 l .

 An nbstrnct summnry of the complaint or alleged act of misconduct.

Pertinent portions of the statements of all pinies to the incidc1H.

 A description of the incident physic11evidence nnd other evidence important to 1he case.

The observmions and conclusions or the investiglling officer.

One of the fincling1listed below will be included in the rt!po11of the investigation of an alleged act of misconduct.

UNPOUNDED The investigation indicates tht the facts complained of did not occur or failed lo involve police personnel.

EXON ERATED Acts did occur but werejtslifiecllawful and proper.

NOT SUSTAINED Investigation faib to discover snfficient cviltnceto clearly prove or disprove the allegations mide in the complnint.

SUSTAINED Invesrignrion discloses sufficient evic1cnccto clearly prove the al!egatiorlsmade in thilcomplaint.

NOT INVOLVED lnvesligation estblishes that the individual receiving this Report of findings was not involved in the alleged incident.

 Section 34.17 Procedures on Appeals lfnnymembershall dc1nanrln hearing before the Board of Supervisors ofSoutl1ParkTownshipon a removal. suspension or reduction in rank if written nnswcrs to the chn-gcre filed with the Manager it shall be the duty of the Monnger to promptly file such answersor a copy !hereof with the Chainnan of the Roardof Supervisors of South ParkTownship.

 following manner Section 3-1.18 Contri.ctPolice Services During normal business hours refer such complaints to the Chief of Police who wil1assign nn officer to investigate.

At olhcr times notify the Officer in Chnrge who will either receive and investigate the complaint himself or instn1ci the supervisor to investignte the complain!  29  Fulure Reference  Section 35 In-Service Training The routine training conducted within the organizational structure of the South Park ToNnship Police Deplnrnent in-service trninin shnl I consist of the following JO  1. firearms Qualificntions 2. First aid tmining  The Training OfCicerwillrubmitto the Deputy Chief of Police in writing his opinion 15to whether the request is valid and fitrthcr action should be initiated to grnnt the officers request.

 3. A ED quarterly trnining  4. CPR training  Section 35.J Responsibilities of an Officer tUcuding a Tniuing SentinirSchool  5. Training films  1.

 6. Departmental trnining session 7. ASP baton certification  8. OCN certification 2.

 111-servicetraining will be conducted when possible on the officers duty time unless otherwise approved by the Chief of Police.

Section 35.1 lInndatory Police Trniuin  4.

 The Municipil Police Officers Educational and Trnining Commission wisestahlished to hlp npgrade the professional police service in Pcnnsylvaniathrough unifon11training for police officers.

The troining is manduory nod unless satisfoc1orily completed will cause the police oflicer to lose his certification as a police oflicer. The total number ofho11rs required under 1hcmandatory training stmcture is adjusted yearly.

The courses established for mandatory training .ire stmdmdizcd througl11.1t the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the lpics change from year to ye1r.

All office.TSwill be scheduled for the mandatory trnining classes .ind are mmdated to nttcnd nnd successfully complete t11eprescribed course of study.

Section 35.2 Training Requests Every police officer is permitted at any time to submit in writing to the Training Officer his request to attend a school or scminJr to further educate the officer.

The trnining request will be submitted in advnnceoflhe scheduled training date nnd willprovide the following infonnation I.

2.

3.

4.

5.

6.

7.

S.

 3.

 Nnme of the officer requesting attendnnce Type of training seminarclass requested Location ofrhe training Tuition costs Cost and tmnsportation or need for transportation Room and board cost ifapplicnblc Date you will require leave to illend Attachment to your request of n bulletin or flyer ex.plainingthe ck1ssif available.

 A.Itrequests for training wit be evaluated on an individual basis and the current needs oflhc officer  5.

 Uponcomplelion of the officers nttendnncein an approved trainingseminnrschool theofficerwill provide a wrillen report ofthehighlights of his trniningto incl11deuny changes in the law or procedures for hnndling specific sin1ntions.

The officer will dlplicnte any handout materials that he feels may be relevant ond important to be distributed to further educale our officers.

If an officer attends n oneday seminarschool at o.minimum he will provide a onepage type written overview of his course for approval and llistribution to the department.

If a triining course is longer than one dny. the officer will be respon9iblc for providing a one-pngc type wrillen overview for each diythnt he nttcnds.

The officer should be prepared from his training that should he be requested to do so.

he will be able to instmct officers from the material he bas obtained.

 Ve arc not able to nd each and every police officer to school. So it will be the responsibilityof the officer who receives the fomrnl training to bring bock and distribute as much imporiant o.ndrelevant material to his fellow officers.

 Section 36 Drn and Alcohol AI.Juse -Stntcrncut  Section 36.1 Drug allll Alcohol Abuse- Goal It is the goal of South Pork Township Poliec Department to provide a safe workplo.ceby elininating the hazards to health and job safety created by alcohol nnd other dug abuse. We believe this goalto be in the best interest of our cmplOYeeS ancl the public.

Section 36.2  Drug nnd Alcohol Abuse - Scope  This policy applies to all employees ofSot1th Park Town.shipPolice Deparlmen1wh.ileonthejob and to situotions where tin employees ofT-lhe-jobconduct impairs work perfonmmceorundem1ines 1he public confidence in or banns the reputation of South Pnrk Township Police Department.

 or department with regard 1 the specific trnining you .ire requestiog.

 32 31  of Need  Sontl1Pnrk Township Police Depirtmenthas astrongcommitrnent to the hcnlth snfety and wc1are of its employees lheirfamilics nnd the public. Viclelynvailable statistics nndinformntion establish t1iat the incidence of drug t1ndalcohol nbusc is increasing and that the effect is devastating to lives and the public al brge. South Park Townhip Police Department is concerned tho.tdue to 1he potential for abuse among some of our employees the snfetyof our employees and the generalpublic could be endangered. Our commitment to mnintnininga safe and secure workplace requires a clear policy end supportive program relnting to the detection treatment and prevention of substanceabuse by employees.

 Although the Sou1b Park Townshi11 Police Depnnm.cnt has no intention of intn1dinginto lhc private  lives of its employees we recognize that involvement with 11Jcoholor other drufs off the job eventunlly takes its toll on job perfonnance. Our concern js to i.ssurethalemployees report to work in condition ro perfonn their duties safely and efficiently in the interc.it of their fellow workers and the public as well as themsel vcs.

 2.

).

 4.

 5.

Section 36.3 I.

 2.

 3.

 Section 36.4  Drug nnd Alcohol Abuse Policy Statement The South PnrkTownship Police Department will not tolerate or condone substance  abuse. lt is the policy of the depanment to mainlain o workplaccfree from alcohol and other drngabnse ond its effects.

It is the policy of South Park Township Police Department that employees who engage in the use or possession of illegal drugs or controlled substancesor who offer to buy or sell such substancesthe use of alcohol during work hours or the abuse of prescribed ci11.1gs will be subject to disciplinary nction up lo and including tenninntion.

It is t11cpolicy of South Park Township Police Ocp.1rtmcntto commit the resources ncccssnry to achieve and maintain n drug and alcohol-free environment. The depai1ment epects the full suppon of this policy by oil employees.

Drng rnrl Alcohol AI.Jusc -Procedure  ).

 Establish definitive mies and regulations.

Provide increased aw.i.rencss through training education nnd communic11tionon!he subject of Icoho I ind othtr drug abuse.

Recognize that there may be employees who have an nlcohol orotherdmgprobtem and stand willing to assist in the resolution of that problem by encouraging employees 1seek help througl1 employee assistance progri.ms.

 Ju adliition the South Park Township Police Depanment may take any or nil of the following netions l.

 2.

Section 36.5  Conduct alco11ol and other drug screening rests both prospective to and during employment.

Inspect persons aud tJ1eirproperty in our employ  Drug nncl Alcohol Abuse Deportments  Seclion 36.6  Responsibility  Drug rnd Alcohol Abuse Employee Responsibility  South Pnrk Township Police Department believes that each employee has the responsibility to 1.

 Report to work at all times free of alcohol or other drugs and their effects.

 2.

 Particip3te in and support departmentsponsorerl clrug and alcohol educr.tion pl-ograms.

Seek and accept assist.nce for alcohol and other drug abuse related problems before job perfonn.i.nceis affected.

Support the South Park Township Police Departments cfforls to eliminate alcohol and other drug abuse among employees where it exists.

 3.

4.

 Section 36.7  To provide n safe drug 1ncl.lcohol-free working environment the depa1tmcnt will.

I.

2.

 Administrr progrnms that consider employee rights are positive in their intent and are within legal boundaries.

Support the establishment of programs to assist employees with alcohol ond other drug abuse or dependency JllOblcms.

Utilize all chnnnels ond resources iwnilable to it to edt1cate nnd increase the .iwnrenessof employees and the general public.

St1ppo1tlocal nnd notional efforts to combat alcohol md other drug abuse and its effects.

 Drng and Alcohol Allusc Policy- lmplcmcntatiou  South Park Township Police Department will be responsible for establishing m1.1 implementing detailed policy and procedures specific to its ne.-ds in support of this policy. Eachoflhese policies is subject to centrnl review for consistency with the departments policy.

 Section 37 Policv on Emplovee Assistance  Section 37.J  Policy on Employee Assistnncc Program  Create nn .iworeness in employees nnd their families of 1hc impnct of substance abuse.

 3)  Gonl  It is the goal of South Park Township Police Department lo establish an employee assistance program to help nnrl encourage tliose employees in need of professional nssistance to use it.

 As a responsible em1loycrnnd rnember of the community the department will I.

 Program -Statement nfNeed  South Park Township Police Depnrtmerithas a strong commitment 1the health safety and welfare of its employees their families nnd the pubic. Tl1edepartment recognizes that a variety of personal problems such as emotional distress family problems alcoholism ond drug auuse can be devastating to lives and the community at Jorge. Most people solve their problems either on their own or with the ndvice of fumily and friends however the department recognizes that sometimes people need pmfcssional olvicc.

 34  sction 37.2  Policy on Employee Assislance Program - Scope  This progrnm npplies to all employees who nre covred under any oft he V..lrious health and welfare progrnn1slo which the depnment contributes.

 Vhlle the department has no intention of intruding into the private lives of its employees we recognize that personal problems may eventually take their toll on job performmce.Our concern is to assure that employeesrepo1t 1work in condition lo pe1fonn 1heirduties safely and eflicienlly in the interest of their fc1lowworkers themselves nnd the public.

Section 37.3  1.

 2.

3.

Section 37.4  Employee .Assistnncc Program PoHcy Statement It is the policy of South Pa.rkTownship Police Department to establish implement and support employee assistance programs that will assist employees to resolve problemssuch as emotional distress. family problems alcoholism and drug abuse recognizingthese problems may adversely affect employees personal he.iith fomily andjob performance.

11is the policy of the department to commit the resources necessmy to support the employee assistnnce program.

This policy will not cxcmptemployees from job perfonnnnce requirements.

EnployecAssistance Progrun - Procedure  South Park Township Police Department employe assistance program will operate within the following frnmework I.

 EmployeescmTentjobs and foture arlvnncement willnotbejcor3rdi1.ed by using the  The South Pnrk Township Police Depi11rne11l being n function of the Township of South Park Municipil Government providing Police Services for the health welfareand safety of the publicand all residents of South Park Township.

Because South Park Township Police Deportment provides Police Service to the general 1mblicit cannot tolerote the threat to public safety of alcohol and olher drug ahuse by ii employees.

Consequently the South PHrk Township Police Department hns a. strict and emphatic policy communicated explicitly to its employees ngainst nlcohol and othcrdrug abuse with stringent remedial action for violation.

South Park Township Police Department will not hire or retain employees who use possess or sell lrngs or nllow workers in the workplnce whose use of legal substances such is alcohol or prescription drugs interfere with safety or perfomance. Employees nre subject to inspection nnd Ltnclercertain conditions to drug nndalcohol testing. lfSou1h Park Township Police Department detennines than an ernployee has violited its substance abuse policy thnt employee is subject Lo remedinl actions up to and including tenninntion.

Employees arc subject to remedial action ifit is confirmed that substance abuse is injuringjob perfomrnncc1 if they are tmlawfully in possession of dnigs. if they ore exhibiting signs of imP3irmcnt from substance abuse or if they nre involved in an accident at work thnt rensonnbly raises the presumption of substance abuse.

 Jf an employee tests positive under qu.1ntitativechemical standardsor is found to possessdmgsthe inclivirlunlmust undergo a mandatory medical evaluation. If treatment is indicated employmentis conditioned upon accepting nnd completing treatment. Also if nn employee uses alcohol or other substances to an extent that interferes with job perfonno.nceor safety lhe individual willbe relieved of duly and sent home pending disciplinary ttction.

 EAPs senices.

 2.

3.

 4.

 5.

 As with all health and personnel documents the EAPsrecords will bcmaintttincd in a confidential manner.

Where applicable and available sick leave may be llSed for tre3tmenl 3nd rehabilitation on the sttme bnsis ns for other heilth problems.

Supervisors and managers are responsible for confronting employees nbou1 unsatisfactoryns well os acceptable blt deteriorutingpcrformnncand referring such employees lo the EAP when approprintc Emp1oyeeswill be responsible for correcting 11ns2.tisfactoryperfonnmce nnd maintaining ncccplable perfonnnncc.

 Section 37.S ErnplO)CeAssistance Program - Jmplcmenruion South Park Township Police Depa11me111 will be responsible for establishing and implcmcnling detailed policy andproceluresspecific to its needs in support of1his policy. Ench oflhcsc policies is subject to central review for consistency with the department policy.

 Becnuse South Piuk Township Police Dtpanment nnc1the Township of Sou1h Park recognize that substance abuse is a disease it holds a constructive policy emphasizing education prevention and rehabilitation over punitive action. The South Pork Township Police Department encourages participation in recogni71ngcommunity-based rind suppolted programs for the overcomingof this disease. Umployces who seek treatmenl may use employer provided health insurance which provides ccess to alcohol nnd other drug treatment programs nnd the Township will not keep records of employees who use these benefits.

South Park Township Police Deprtmenlemployees who seek treatmentcan contact the Peer Conlact Oflicer for a con fidentinlreferral to an Employee Assistance Contact The Peer Contncl Officerwill notify the Chief of Police.

 Section 38 Drng Testing Policy TheSouth PnrkTownship Police Department has a legal responsibilityancl management obligation to ensure a safe work environment ns well a!. n parunmmt interest in protecting the public by  36 35  ensuring that its officcrsJrnvethe physical stnmina and crnotionl stability to pcrfonn their assigned  duties.

The abuse of drugs or chemical substances is illegal and counterproductive to the good order and reputation of the police department nnd wi11 not be tolerated. Ollicers musr have physical coordination and unfo1paired judgment to react prndcntly nnd effectively 1 the demands of the police service.

 Mandatory druganalysis will be conducted only upon the approval of Ihe Chief of Police or Deputy Chief of Police oder the following circumstances I.

 2.

3.

 Section 38.1  Drug Testing Policy Purpose  This order states Polic Depar1ment Policy relative to the use of narcotics illegal dntgs and the abuse  4.

 oflegally prescribeddrugsby any memberof the SouthPnrk TownshipDepartmentof Policeand sets forth conditions in which drug tests will be required.

 5.

6.

 Section 38.2  Drug Testing lolicy    Definitions  A. The tenn .Lffi!g includes cannabis narcotics or controlled substances as defined under the Pennsylvania Crirne Code Con1rolled Substance Drng Device and Cosmetic Act.

8. Theterm Drug Abuse incudes the use of cannabis narcotics or nnycontrolled substance which hns not been legally prescribed aodor dispensed or the abl1Seof a legally prescribed dmg.

C. Rs9n1ble Supjcion Standnrds  An apprent state of facts andor circumstances found to exist by a supervisor which would cause a rcasonnble intelligent person to believe the employee to be under lhe influenceoro userofdrngs or narcotics. TI1estin(h1rdsofreaso1able suspicion is less  Section 38.5 1.

 A. The useofillegnl dn1gs c.o.nnnbisornonpresclibed controlkclsubsiances or thcabuseoflegally prescribed drugs or controlled subsrnnces by n member of the South Pnrk Towtship Police Department is strictly prohibited.

 5.

 6.

 the drug testingconsent fonn. If the accused officer is unable to read the consent forrnthe supervisors1111 reod i1to the officer. A copy of1heconsentformwillbe given to the nccuscd officer. The supervisor will rcta.inft copy of the consenl fonn.

A supervisor will transport the accused officer to the approved testing facility and  3.

 1.

 1  Violation of this policy will resul I in disciplinary netion.

B. Refusal by a police officer lo lake the required dmgtest shall be considered lnsubordination and  will res11l1in the immediate relief from hisher police duties pending disposition or any administmtivc action.

Section 38.4 Drug Testing Policy - lIn11d1toryDrug Testing  Mandatory drug tes1ing is the submission of a urine specimen in order to test such samples for the  presenceof drugs.

 Proccdurc.s for the Orctcring of Drug Testing in Cases ofReasonihle Suspition A mnkingoffic.er(Chief or Deputy Chief) will be notified by the initiatingsupcrisor of the circumslnnccileding to the request for o dmg test.

lf the request for a drug lcsl is approved the supervisor Rquestincthe tesl will direct  memo to the Chief or Deputy Chief of Police indicating the circumstances of reasonablesuspicionwhich formed the basis of the request. If the basis for the request includes infractions oftheniles nnd regulntions n report will nccornpanytl1e request expliining the infraction.

The 1nemowill then be presented to thenccused officer who willsign his or hername to the bottom of the reort indicating that they h3.veread it This signnture will in no way be considered nn admission of guilt but only ocknowledgmentof thefact 1hat the report w3s read. A copy of this report will be given to the accused officer.

An nccu.oed officer who refuses to submit to u properly required dmg test shall be deemed insubordinmennd charges shall be preferred by the requesting supervisoror other comrnnndingofficer and the accused officer will be transported home.

If the accused officer ngrees to take 1hec1mgtest 1heofficer shnll complete nnclsign  2.

 rhan probable cause.

Section 38.3 Drug Testing Policy General Rules  B11sedon reasonable suspicion citing specific instances when n. member was inc3pa.bleof pcrfonning his or her required duties or exhibited unusunl work pcrfom111ncemeasures 1111dor behavioral trnits At any time during the probntionory period as defined by the working agreement between Sou1hPark Township and the Sot1th Park Township Police Union.

For counseling assistance programs or as a condition of disciplinary action due to prior dmg abuse.

Prior to assignment to special units i.e. narcotics unit invcstigntionsunitjuvenile unit and trarfie unit.

Rnndom testing lwice ench yenr for personnel assigned lo special units as listed above.

When Rnofficer is scheduled for a physical cxnniination to rctum to duty after nn absence of four days or more which nonnally requires a physicalexaminationandtl1e officer has a recordof excessive absenteeism.

 will stand by untiI 1he test has been administered and will then transport the officer home. At the 1esting facility the supervisor shall complete and sign the lnboratory request form ror lhe clrugtest indica1ing the name of 1heaccused officer to be tested n11dthe telephone number of the Chief of Police who is the person to be cont1e1ed  when the resullsofthe dntg tests are available.

 37  38  3. Renewal 7.

 Section 38.6  Upon completion of the dnig test a copy of II police rcpons will be forwnrdcd through the chain of commnnd to the Chief of Police.

 Employees granted approval of nn outside employment request shall submit a Request for Outside Employment fonn for renewal as follows  Alleguions of Misccllmeous Drug-Related Aclivlty On  a. Annually by Jnn11aryJI of each year.

 1  Off Oury  Allegations of miscellaneous dn1g-relntedactivity which would be considered reasonable suspicion requiring n rlrug test include but Me not limited ro rhe following I.

2.

 Illegal sales delivery manufacture purchase or possession of drugs and narcolics.

Whenever the results of preliminmy crimiml investigation indicate a reason(lble  b. Immediately upon nny significnnt change in the specific duties outlincclin the prior request.

c. I .imitations on Outside Employment  Jn no case may an employee accept outside emp1)1ncot in 1hefollowing cases  1  I.

 suspicion to believe rhat lhc o.ccused officer is involved in illcgil dmg-Telated  2.

 activity or upon completion of the initial tngcsofnn ndmini5trati.veinvestigation  3.

4.

5.

6.

 which indicares a reason3ble suspicion 1 believe that the accused officer is  3.

 Section 39  11erso1rnllyusing illegal drugs 1 is personnlly misusing or nbusinglegallyprescribed or dispensed medications.

A reisonable suspicion exists when a person has a reasonable belief that an individtial is under lhe influence of a dmg or dmgs which affect behavior supportable by direct observation articulate reasons nnd common sense. The following in nddilion to the other evidence of suspected clmgabusemay give rise to a reasonable suspicion to believe that nn employccs 1hysicalor mental nbilitics to perfonn 1ssignedduties alld responsibilities are affected by drugs  1f the circumstances of the employment nre contrmy to department policy.

Duties in excess of twenty-four hours per week on scheduled workdays.

Duties at locations where alcoholic beverages are served for profit.

Duties as bail bondsman or recovering bail jumpers.

Dl1t.iesas a.privnte security !1Uard within the bordersof South Parle.

Towmhip.

Duiies that resulL in a connict of lnterest with the law enforcement profession.

 4. Enforcement - Officers must be awnre thn1their job perfonnance wilh South ParkTownsl1ip Police Department is n priority. If during an officers fonnal evaluation it becomesipparent that nn individual officers job perfomiancc is not up to stm1dard the1 the officer may be required to decrease lhe amount of hours being spent or tcminate their outside employment.

 Outside Employment  A. Responsibility of ThisDenanmcnt - All members of this department who engage in outside secondary emp1oymentnmt1mcicrstandthat their primary responsibilityand obligation is to this department. AU members are subject to callouts for emergencies special assignments or cxtra dt1ty. Vhen such situotions orise they shall toke precedence over any out.Sideemployment.

 Section 4  .Toh Steworcls  The Employer recognizes the right of the Union to lesignateJob Stewards and oltematcs. The authority of Job Stewards ond alternates so desi1J1atcd by the Union shall be limilcd nod shallnot exceed the fo!Jowing dulies rmd ac1ivitics A hwcstigotion nnd presentation of brricvc111ces in accordance with the provisions of the Collective 8ugaini ng Agreement.

 B. Request - DjstribUtion- Rencwnl I.  Request for approval outside employment sll311he prepared in trip1icuteon the Request for Outside Employment fonn nnd submitted lo the Chief of Police who recommendsnpproval or rejection. The request is then forwarded to the Township Manager for review nnd approval.

 B. Job StcwMds and alternates have no authority to lnke strike action or any other action intem1pling the Employers business.

 2. Distribution a. Original - Depar1rnempersonnel file.

b. Photocopy- Municipal personnel file.

c. Photocopy Employee.

 39  4  Seclion 41  Effective  Onie  Jheeffectivc date of this Agreementfor all tenns conditionsand provisionscontiincdherclnshall be 121 A.M. on the J st day of fanuary 21 S nnd shall contirne in force and effect uutil 12 midnight on the 3 Jst dny of December 221. It is further agreed th81on the request of either party heretothepartieswill 111eet ntuchtime or times afterJuly 1 221 for tl1epurposeof negotiatinga  new agreementto be effective January l 1 222. The pu1vose of such e.irly meeting is in orderto enable the parties to comply with the provisions of P.A. STAT. ANN. Tit. 43217.3.

 TEAISTERS LOCAL UNION NO. 25  SOUTll PARK TOWNSHIP  Date  ii - I .l.-  IR  41  
