AGREEMENT between  THE COUNTY OF ALLEGHENY  and  THE ALLEGHENY COUNTY (D.A.) DETECTIVE ASSOCIATION  The tenn of the agreement shall be from July I 213 until June 3 217.

 TABLE OF CONTENTS Page  Article  Title  I.

 Term of Agreement  I  11.

 Definitions  2  III.

 Recognition  3  rv.

 Grievance Procedure  4  V.

 Uninterrupted Operation and Continuous Service  7  VI.

 Vacations  8  VII.

 Sick Leave  1  VIII.

 Funeral Leave  13  IX.

 Effect of Agreement  14  X.

 Management Rights  15  XI.

 Retirement  16  XII.

 Severability  17  XIII.

 Jury Duty  18  XIV.

 Clothing Allowance  19  XV.

 Compensation  2  XVI.

 Insurance Benefits  23  XVII.

 Non-Discrimination  3I  XVIll.

 Tuition Reimbursement  32  XIX.

 Rights to Information  33  xx.

 Seniority  34  XXL  Fair Share  35  ARTICLE I TERM OF AGREEMENT The tenn of the Agreement shall be from July 1 213 until June 3 217 (i.e. a period of four (4) years).

 1  ARTICLE 11DEFINITIONS For the purposes of this Agreement the following words shall have the meaning set forth below I. County - is the managerial representative and shall specifically mean the Managers of the County of Allegheny or the Managers designees.

 2. Employee - is an individual employed by the County in the unit defined below.

3. Union - is an employee organization as defined in Act 111 and shall specifically mean the ALLEGHENY COUNTY (D.A.) DETECTIVES ASSOCIATION.

4. Unit - a group of County employees appointed by the District Attorney excluding all management level employees supervisors first level supervisors and confidential employees.

 2  ARTICLE Ill RECOGNITION  The County hereby recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive bargaining representative of the unit employees with respect to such tenns and conditions of employment exclusively within the control of the County Managers and excluding those terms and conditions of employment which might affect the authority of the District Attorney to hire terminate and supervise unit employees.

 3  ARTICLE IV GRJEVANCE PROCEDURE I. Grievance Procedure Definitions A. Grievance - An alleged breach or violation of this Agreement or a dispute arising out of the interpretation or application of the provisions of this Agreement.

B. Grievant- Any employee or group of employees claiming the alleged breach or violation of this Agreement or claiming a dispute has arisen out of the interpretation or application of the provisions of the Agreement.

2. Scope of Grievance Procedure A. Any matter not specifically covered by a provision of this Agreement as well as any matter reserved to the discretion of the County by the statutes legal precedents and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania andor by the terms of this Agreement is not a grievance and will not be construed as a grievance.

 B. An election by the grievant to utilize the procedure will preclude such issue from being raised in any other manner or proceeding.

 3. Procedural Steps for Grievance Processing A. Leel One - Department of Emplovee Relations  An alleged grievance may be reduced to writing within seven (7) work days from the alleged occurrence of the grievance or within seven (7) work days from the time the grievant reasonably should have known or been aware of the existence of the situation given rise to the alleged grievance. The written grievance which must be submitted on an approved form and signed by the grievant and an authorized Union representative must be filed with the Manager of Labor Relations or his authorized representative. The Manager or his representative and the Union shall meet either with or without the Grievant. and attempt to settle the grievance.

 4  B. Level Two - County If the Union is dissatisfied with the decision at Level One or no decision was rendered within five (5) work days of the submission of the alleged grievance at Level One the Union may within five (5) work days after a decision at Level One or ten ( I) work days after the grievance was submitted at Level One whichever is sooner submit the grievance in writing to the County Managers or their designees. The Managers or their designees will consider the merits of the alleged grievance and render a Vrittendecision within twelve ( 12) calendar days of the submission of the alleged grievance to them.

C. Level Three - Arbitration If the Union is not satisfied with the decision at Level Two it may vithin five (5) work days after a decision at Level Two or within fifteen ( 15) calendar days after the alleged grievance was submitted at Level Two whichever is soon serve written notice upon the County that it intends to submit the allege grievance to arbitration. Within eight (8) calendar days of said appeal notice the representatives of the Parties shall confer in an attempt to reach mutual agreement on an arbitrator. Should the Parties fail to agree on an arbitrator they will jointly request the Pennsylvania Bureau of Mediation to provide them with a panel of seven (7) arbitrators. The County shall strike a name from the panel and the Parties shall then strike alternately until only one proposed arbitrator remains. The neutral arbitrator selected shall hear the case and render a written decision as soon as possible. The decision of the neutral arbitrator shall be in writing and shall be final and binding and in accordance with the terms of Act 111 of the 197. The neutral arbitrator is authorized only to clarify and interpret the express terms provisions or clauses of this Agreement and docs not have the authority to enlarge alter modify. delete or change the express tenns. provisions or clauses of this Agreement.

 4. Miscellaneous Provisions A. It is agreed that any grievance must be presented under the procedures of this article promptly and within the prescribed time limitations. Any grievance not presented within the time limitations of each level shall be considered settled on the basis of the decision which was not appealed or shall be deemed settled on the basis of the decision in the last level to which the grievance was carried and shall not be further appealed or filed as a new grievance. Time limits in the appeal steps may be extended by mutual consent of the parties.

B. Conferences meetings and hearings held pursuant to this grievance procedure shall be set by mutual agreement.

C. The Union shall inform the County in wTitingof all persons authorized to  s  senle grievances on a level or advance grievances to the next level. Only such persons shall settle andor advance such grievances. All answers to and advances of grievances in and from Level One and above shall be in writing with reasons.

D. Forms for filing and appealing grievances shall be prepared by the County and approved by the Union. The Union shall distribute these forms to its members on an as needed basis and shall obtain a grievance number from the Department of Employee Relations for each grievance it intends to file prior to that filing.

E. All employees attending conference meetings andor hearings involving this grievance procedure will do so on their own time.

F. The Union and the County will each bear its own costs incurred in the grievance procedure except that both parties will share the cost of the neutral arbitrator equally.

G. Nothing in this Article shall prevent the parties from settling an alleged grievance to their mutual satisfaction prior to the issuance of the arbitrators decision.

H.

 None of the foregoing shall relieve the District Attorney from the requirement of establishing just cause grounds for the imposition of any discipline up to and including termination with respect to unit employees. (1996 award).

 6  ARTICLE V UNINTERRUPTEDOPERATIONAND CONTINUOUS SERVICE I. The Union recognizes that it is absolutely necessary for the County to be operated on a twenty-four (24) hour seven (7) day a week basis and that the Countys operations be properly manned.

2. The Union and the employees accept the responsibility of insuring that every employee exerts every effort to assure that all shifts are properly manned at all times.

3. Under no circumstances shall the Union cause or permit its members to cause nor will any member of the Union take part in any strike sit down stay-in or slowdown affecting any site operated by the County or any curtailment of work or restriction of County services or interfere with any of the operations of the County in any manner.

4. It is understood that the Union shall not be liable for damages if the Union its agents or representatives are not legally responsible for the acts of its members.

 7  ARTICLE VI VACATIONS  I. Vacation Entitlement A. Employees hired after July I shall not be entitled to vacation in the year in  which hired. Employees hired before July I shall be entitled to a pro rata paid vacation in the calendar year in which first employed in accordance with the following schedule DATE HIRED  VACATIONS ENTITLEMENT  January l through end of February March l through March 3 l  4 days  April I through April 3  3 days  May I through May 3  2 days  June I through June 3  I day  5 days  All other full-time permanent employees actively employed on January I shall be eligible for paid  acation in that calendar year in accordance with the follOvingschedule and eligibility requirements  IJANUARY YEARS EMPLOYED AS  WORK DAYS OF VACATION  I  j Less than I  5 days  l through 5  1 days  6 through 14  15 days  15 through 2  2 days  21  21 days  I 22  22 days  I  23 days  23 8  24  24 days  25 or more  25 days  2. Vacation Eligibility A. In order to be eligible for vacation an employee must have received earnings or earnings and compensable disability credited to thirteen (13) pay periods in the previous year. Any employee who received earnings or earnings and compensable disability credited to six (6) pay periods in the previous year shall be entitled to one-half ( 12) of the regular vacation.

B. Employees who have resigned after giving less than five (5) working days prior notice and probationary employees shall not be eligible for vacation benefits.

3. If a holiday occurs during an employees vacation the employee shall not be charged for a vacation day on the day of the holiday.

4. Vacation Schedule A.

 o later than December of any calendar year employees shall indicate their vacation preferences on forms supplied by the County.

 B. The County shall service in various the efficiency of requested no later  schedule vacations giving preference based on continuous job classifications. Scheduling may take into consideration County operations. The County shall schedule vacations than December 3 in a calendar year.

 C. Any employee who fails to submit a vacation request as set forth in Section A above shall be scheduled without regard to continuous service.

D. Vacation schedules shall not be changed without mutual agreement between the County and the Union.

5. In the event of an employees death any vacation benefits to which the employee would have otherwise been entitled shall be paid to the employees surviving spouse or the estate.

6. The period of time for enjoyment of the benefits of this Article shall be governed by the District Attorneys policy. but will not be shorter than the time schedule set forth above.

 (The language in this Article is from the 23 Agreement.)  9  ARTICLE VII SICK LEAVE  l. Sick Leave Entitlements During the term of this Agreement eligible bargaining unit employees will be permitted sick leave absences from work without loss of pay based upon sick day entitlements to be credited to each employee based upon hisher date of hire as follows  A. Employees hired after June 3 of any year of this Agreement shall not be entitled to sick leave in the year in which hired. Employees hired before July 1 in any year of this Agreement shall be credited with sick day entitlements for that calendar year on a pro rata basis under the following schedule  SICK DAY ENTITLEMENTS  DATE HIRED January 1 through February 28  5 days  March 1 through March 31  4 days  April I through April 3  3 days  May I through May 31  2 days  June l through June 3  I day  I 8. All other full-time permanent employees who are not probationary not on layoff or a leave of absence but in active employment status on January l of any calendar year shall be granted ten (1) work days of sick leave credit for that year providing all other eligibility requirements are met by such employees on that date.

2. Eligibility Limitations  A. In order to be eligible for full sick day credit for any calendar year an employee must have received earnings or earnings and compensable disability pay in at least thirteen ( 13) pay periods in the previous calendar year. Any employee who received earnings or earnings and compensable disability pay in at least six (6) pay periods in the previous calendar year shall be credited with one-half ( 12) of the regular sick day entitlements. for the current calendar year.

 1  B. The sick day credit limits of this provision shall not apply to employees with less than twelve ( 12) months of continuous service with the Company as of January I of any calendar year.

3. Sick Leave Procedures A. All sick days shall be applied on a work day basis however no additional time shall be granted for holidays occurring while an employee is on sick leave.

B. Employees shall notify their immediate supervisor as soon as possible that they will be on sick leave.

C. Employees who are on sick leave for more than three (3) consecutive work days shall be required to submit a doctors certificate upon returning to work.

A head of a department may require a doctors certificate after one days sick leave.

D. It shall be understood by both Employer and employees that sick leave is a benefit earned by service and is available when and if needed and shall not be a right of taking as vacation or other such time off for reasons other than disability for work.

4. Sick Leave Accumulations Sick Leave may be accumulated to a total of 132 work days.

(I 996 award).

5. The period of time for enjoyment of this Article shall be governed by the District Attorneys policy but will not be shorter than the time schedule set forth above.

6. Reimbursement For Sick-Leave Days Accumulated A member of the bargaining unit who retires shall be entitled to reimbursement for sickleave days accumulated as of the retirement date at the then applicable daily wage rate limited to 132 (one hundred thirty-two) such days. Should a member of the bargaining unit die while employed by the County the County shall reimburse his or her beneficiary for his or her sick-leave days accumulated at the date of death at the applicable daily wage rate limited to 132 (one hundred thirty-two) such days. (1996 award).

7. Commencing January 1 27 Detectives will have the right to sell back to the County up to five (5) sick days per year at one-hundred percent ( 1) of their then current daily rate. The sell-back shall occur at the end of the calendar year. (26 award).

8. Sick Leave Denotation Program In an effort to reduce hardship experienced by an employee obliged to be absent from employment due to personal illness or non-work related injury. a Sick-Leave Donation 11  Program is hereby established. The Program shall work on an as-needed basis.

Employees shall be permitted to donate up to twenty (2) sick-leave days from their accumulated leave bank to fellow bargaining unit employees. Sick leave may only be donated under the Program to employees with a serious injury or illness which is defined as a condition or combination of conditions effecting the mental or physical health or condition of the employee which requires the ongoing treatment by a healthcare provider and renders the employee unable to perform the functions of his or her job. No employee may be granted donated sick leave unless and until the employee has exhausted bisher annual and accumulated sick leave vacation and personal days. An employee who has received donated sick leave shall not be permitted to sell back any of said leave annually or at separation from service. Employees utilizing donated sick leave under the Program may be charged with FMLA leave entitlement if so required by the Countys FMLA policy.

(Sections 1234 and 7 arefrom the 1984 award. Section JO isfrom the 214 award)  12  ARTICLE VIII FUNERAL LEAVE I. A County paid employee with thirty (3) days continuous service who is absent from work because of the death of a father or step-father mother or step-mother spouse mother-in-law father-in-law child or step-child brother or step-brother sister or step- sister grandparent or grandchild will be compensated for time lost by reason of such absence from his regularly scheduled straight-time shift hours up to a maximum of four (4) days for each such shift. Such paid leave will be limited to four (4) consecutive work days within a period of seven (7) days starting the day immediately following the day of death.

2. Employees shall be permitted up to three (3) days of absence with pay concerning the funeral of a son-in-law daughter-in-law brother-in-law or sister-in-law.

3. In all cases above payments shall be calculated on straight time hours and shall not include any overtime premium payments.

4. The period of time for enjoyment of this Article shall be governed by the District Attorneys policy but will not be shorter than the time schedule set forth above.

5. Employees shall be permitted a one (1) day of absence with pay concerning the funeral of an aunt or uncle.

 (The language in this Article is from the 23 Agreement. Section 5 is from the 214 award)  13  ARTICLE IXEFFECT OF AGREEMENT l. The parties mutually agree that the terms and conditions expressly set forth in this Agreement represent the full and complete understanding agreement and commitment between the parties thereto.

2. All items proposed whether agreed to or rejected will not be subject to renegotiation until negotiations for a new contract commence in accordance with the provisions of Act Ill and items included within the scope of bargaining which were or are not proposed shall likewise not be subject to negotiation until the period specified above.

 14  ARTICLE XMANAGEMENTRJGHTS The County retains and reserves unto itself all powers rights authority duties and responsibilities conferred upon and vested in it by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and all matters not covered by this Agreement and incorporated Awards.

 15  ARTICLEXIRETIREMENT 1. All employees shall be required to become members of the Employees Retirement System upon appointment. Contributions shall be made in accordance with controlling statutes and Retirement Board standards.

2. All employees who are eligible shall also become members of the Old Age and Survivors Insurance Fund (Social Security) upon appointment.

 16  ARTICLE XII SEVERABILITY Any article section provision sentence or clause of this Agreement held to be illegal will not be deemed valid except to the extent permitted by law however the remainder of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect for the entire term of this Agreement andor Incorporated Awards. (1996 award).

 17  ARTICLE XIII JURY DUTY I. County employees who are asked to serve on jury duty shall be granted leave with pay for the work days that they serve on jury duty or appear with the possibility of serving on jury duty.

2. Any payment received for jury service shall be deducted from the employees nonna1 daily County compensation.

 (The language in this Article is from the 23 Agreement.)  18  ARTICLE XIV CLOTHING ALLOWANCE Each County Detective covered by this Agreement shall be paid a cash clothing allowance of seven hundred fifty dollars ($75.) per year. This is an annual clothing allowance of seven hundred fifty dollars ($75.) not to be compounded for the length of this contract.

(23 award).

 19  ARTICLE XVCOMPENSATION l. All Detectives shall receive the following across-the-board salarywage increases in the following manner  July 1213 July 1214 Julyl215 July I 216  2.5 2.5 2.75 3.

 SALARY RATES  I  711212  Up to 12 months (8)  S61119.1  71213 (2.5) $62647.8  12 to 24 months (85)  S64939..

 $66562.52  $68226.58  $7 I 2.81  $7225.89  24 to 36 months (9) C er 36 months ( 1)  S68758.98  $7477.95  $72239.9  $74226.5  $76453.3  7  $7838.84  s8266.s6  $82.473.89  $84948.11  I  s-6.398.8  71214 (2.5) $64213.26  71215 (2.75) $65979.12  71216 (3.) $67958.49  I  (Section 1 isfrom rhe 21. award.)  2. Longevity Pay A. Effective July I 2 each bargaining unit employee shall receive longevity pay increments based upon and for each year of continuous service in that status as follows 1 of the base annual wage beginning 3rd year of service   2 of the base annual age beginning 5th year of service    2.25 of the base annual wage beginning 6th year of service    2.5 of the base annual age beginning 7th year of service    2.75 of the base annual age beginning 8th ) ear of scr- ice 2    3 of the base annual wage beginning 91h)ear of service    3.25 of the base annual wage beginning Ith year of service    3.5 of the base annual wage beginning 11thyear of service 3. 75 of the base annual .agebeginning 12th year of service    4 of the base annual wage beginning 13thyear of service    -US of the base annual wage beginning 14thyear of service    -t.5 of the base annual wage beginning 15th)ear of service    4.75 of the base annual wage beginning 16th year of service    5 of the base annual wage beginning 17th year of service    5.25 of the base annual wage beginning 18th year of service    5.5 of the base annual wage beginning 19th year of service    6.25 of the base annual wage beginning 2th year of service    6.5 of the base annual wage beginning 21st year of service    6.75 of the base annual wage beginning 22nd year of service    7 of the base annual wage beginning 23rd year of service    1  .25 of the base annual age beginning 24th )ear of ser. ice  8 of the base annual age beginning 25th )ear of service 8.25 of the base annual wage beginning 26th year of service   9 of the base annual age beginning 27th year of sen-ice    9.25 of the base annual wage beginning 28th year of service    I of the base annual wage beginning 29th year of service (2 award)  8. Longevity pay entitlements under this provision shall be granted and included as an add on to the base annual salary entitlements of each bargaining unit employee. as of each anniversary date of his or her having last been sworn in on the Detective District Attorney nvestigations job.

C. Entitlements under this pro ision shall be paid on an incremental basis. for and from the first day of the first pay period following an effective 21  employment anniversary date thereof or from the first day of the first pay period following July I 1984 whichever is later to each eligible employee.

(198. award).

3.

 o employee shall receive the benefit of both the raise granted by this Agreement and a raise required by non-contractual occurrence. The purpose of this provision is to make sure that employees receive only the contractual raise.

 4. Overtime Pay and Compensatory Time A. Overtime shall be paid at one and one-half times the employees regular rate for all hours worked in excess of 4 hours per week or eight (8) hours per day.

A reasonable effort will be made by the County and District Attorney to rotate the overtime work among those members performing a similar class of work based initially upon seniority.

 B. When it is acceptable to employer and employee the County may grant and the employee may accumulate compensatory time off in lieu of overtime.

C. There shall be no pyramiding of overtime or compensatory time.

D. If an employee is off duty and called out he or she shall receive a minimum four (4) hours at straight time reporting pay.

E. Any employee whose employment is terminated for any reason shall be paid for all accumulated overtime as per AAA Award 55-39-198-75.

F. The County shall pay the Detectives for all accumulated unused compensatory time at separation from employment. (26 award).

G. If a Detective is subpoenaed to appear in Court or is otherwise called to duty while on a vacation day the County shall pay said Detective overtime for that time at the rate of one and one-halftimes the employees regular rate of pay.

 Sections A B .C. and Din this Article are from the 2 award. Section G is from the 214 award).

 22  ARTICLE XVI INSURANCE BENEFITS I.

 Insurance Practices A. The Employer shall have the right to select the insurance carrier plan trust or  self-insure provided no overall reduction in benefits results. Reference to a specific carrier is not intended to bind the Employer to procure the bargained for benefits from that carrier.

B. All eligibility and benefits shall be in accordance with the provisions of the insurance policies trusts plans and related documents.

 2.

 Life Insurance A. Effective July 1 23 term life insurance shall be raised to forty-five thousand dollars ($45) with double indemnity for accidental death on the identical terms as the additional line of duty benefit currently received by Allegheny County Police Officers. (23 Award).

B. Active regular full-time permanent employees may purchase additional term life insurance on the same basis as has existed prior to the execution of this Agreement. The active regular full-time perm.anent employees contribution for this additional insurance shall not exceed forty-eight cents ($.48) per thousand per month.

C. The present practices relating to insurance for retired employees shall continue.

D. In order to receive the benefits of 2 aboe employees shall comply with all regulations of the provider for the County in relation to application and certification of insurance benefits.

 3. Eligibilitv A. As of October 1 1993 the Ten Dollars ($1.) per month health participation fee in eliminated for all employees.

B. It is understood that eligible employees who have elected to waive participation in the County health insurance program shall be compensated at Five Ilundred Dollars ($5.) for the benefit year October I. 1993 through September 3 1994 to be payable in December of 1994. This shall be increased to Seven Ilundred Fifty Dollars ($75.) for the benefit year of 23  October I 1994 through September 3 1995 to be payable in December of 1995. The third year shall increase to One Thousand Dollars ($1) for the benefit year of October 1 1995 through September 3 1996 to be payable in December of 1996.

C. It is also understood that the employee may re-enter the program at any time upon economically change circumstances. For instance if an employee has a spouse who has coverage and the spouse loses said coverage or coverage may be death divorce layoff or such other matter which is not a medically based change but which is due to a change in economic circumstances. Other eligible employees who may wish to participate after waiver will meet the normal rules of the carrier.

 (The language added above to this Section 1993 Memorandum of Understanding) 4. Health Insurance During the term of this Agreement each employee may elect the entire health insurance package coverage for the employee or for the employee and the employees family. if the employee does not have equal or better coverage through an insurance plan provided by an employer of the employees spouse the County provides the following A. Effective January I 27 the Plan shall be Highmark Select Blue Preferred Provider Organization. (26 award.) 1. Members of the bargaining unit shall be included in the Allegheny Countys basic hospitalization program which covers the Countys management employees when a majority of County employees represented by unions accept the same. (26 award).

B. Regular full-time employees covered by thjs agreement will be eligible to participate in the Countys hospitalization plan after the 1st 9 days of employment.

C. Regular full-time employees covered under this agreement will be eligible to participate in the Higbmark PPO Blue Plan. The main features of the healthcare plan are as follows  I. Co-pays - Effective July l 213 or with the date of the new plan implementation in 213 whichever is later co-pays per visit during the Agreement shall be as follows I Wellness I Program I Participants  213  24  214  215  216  I  Doctor visits  $2.

 $2.

 $25.

 $25.

 Mental Health  Substance Abuse  $2.

 $2.

 $25.

 $25.

 Emergency Room  $1.

 $1.

 $1.

 $1.

 213  214  215  216  $4.

 $4.

 $4.

 $4.

 Mental Health  Substance Abuse  $4.

 $4.

 $4.

 $4.

 Emergency Room  $1.

 $1.

 $1.

 $1.

 Non-Wellness Program Participants Doctor visits  Prescriptions - Effective July 1 213 or with the date of the new plan implementation in 213 whichever is later prescriptions shall be as follows Wellness Program Participants  213  214  215  216  Tier I Drugs (Generic Drugs)  $5.

 $5.

 $5.

 $5.

 Tier 2 Drugs (BrandFonnulary)  $2.

 $2.

 $2.

 $2.

 Tier 3 Drugs (Brand NonFonnulary)  $5.

 $5.

 $5.

 $5.

 I  (Charges for mail order shall be double these amounts)  Non-Wellness Program Participants  213  214  215  I I  I 25  216  I  Tier I Drugs (Generic Drugs)  $1.

 $1.

 $1.

 Tier 2 Drugs (BrandFormulary)  $2.

 $2.

 $2.

 $2.

 Tier 3 Drugs (Brand NonFormularv)  $5.

 $5.

 $5.

 $5.

 $1.

 (Charges for mail order shall be double these amounts)  (214 award) 2. Chiropractor visits - 2 visit maximum per benefit period.

3. Physical therapy occupational therapy and speech therapy visits shall be unlimited.

4. Effective January l 2 l  the healthcare plan shaJI have an individual deductible of $2 per calendar year or a family deductible of $4 per calendar provided however that if the covered employee completes the requirements of the Lifestyle Returns Wellness Program offered by Highmark the $2$4 deductibles will be waived as set forth below.

a. The Lifestyle Returns Program will include i.) a Pledge ii.) a Health Risk Assessment iii.) scheduling preventie exams iv.) participating in two health and wellness programs and v.) completing the requirements of a healthy education course (reading about a particular subject and completing a survey.) b. To be eligible for the waiver of the $2 individual and $4 family deductible for calendar year 2 I  the covered employee must complete all of the requirements of the Lifestyle Returns program in 29 before September 3 29. To be eligible for the waiver of the $2 individual and $4 family deductible for subsequent calendar years the covered employee must complete the Lifestyle Returns program each year before September 3 of the previous calendar year.

c. A newly hired employee shall not be subject to the $2$4 deductibles during the calendar year in which 26  the employee is hired. In order for the deductible to be waived in the year following the year in which the employee is hired the employee must comply with the Lifestyle Returns participation requirements set forth above as follows (!) employees who become eligible for healthcare  benefits between January 1 and March 31 shall be required to complete all the steps of the wellness program by September 3 (2) employees who become eligible for healthcare benefits between April 1 and July 31 shall be required to complete the first three (3) steps of the wellness program (i.e. i.) a Pledge and ii.) a Health Risk Assessment and iii.) scheduling preventive exams) by September 3 (3) employees who become eligible for healthcare benefits between August I and December 1 shall be required to complete the first two (2) steps of the wellness program (i.e. i.) a Pledge and ii.) a l lcalth Risk Assessment) within 6 days of becoming eligible for healthcare benefits.

5. Deductibles Effective July l 213 or with the date of the new plan implementation in 213 whichever is later. the following changes to the healthcare plan take effect a. The In-Network Deductibles (Individual Family) for Wellness Program participants will be  213 $2$4  214 $2$4  215 $25$5  216 $25$5  b. For Non-Wellness Program participants In-Network  Deductibles (IndividuaVFarnily) will increase from $2$4 to $6$12 for all years.

 213 $6$12  214 $6$12  215 $6$12  216 $6$12  c. For all participants Out-of-Network Deductibles (Individual Family) at $45$135 for a11years.

 213 27  214  215  216  $45 $135  $45 $ I 35  $45 $135  S45 $135  (214 award)  D. All covered participants must verify dependent eligibility upon request. For employees who opt not to be covered under County plans they may re-enroll annually during the open enrollment period. They may re-enroll earlier upon the occurrence of one of the following 1. Death of a spouse 2. Divorce or legal separation 3. Lay off of spouse 4. Voluntary resignation of spouse 5. Involuntary resignation of spouse 6. Retirement of spouse (causing a reduction in health care benefits) 7. Spouses coverage is reduced through no fault of spouse 8. The employee loses coverage from other employment.

 E. All benefits shall be coordinated and not duplicated.

F. Dental Insurance Dental Insurance shall be available to all employees eligible to participate in the health plan.

I. Employees may choose either the Concordia Flex plan or the Concordia Plus program.

2. The actual cost of the Concordia Flex plan will be shared by the County paying (9) and all participating employees contributing ten percent ( I ) by payroll deduction.

3. The County shall pay towards the cost of an employees participation in the Concordia Flex program an amount of not more than it would have paid for such employees participation in the Concordia Plus plan.

4. The Concordia Flex plan shall have an individual deductible of $5 28  I  per calendar year or a family deductible of $1 per calendar year.

G. Both the health plan and dental plan described above are subject to changes (including but not limited to changes in the names of the plans) which may be made by the carriers of those plans. In the event that the carriers indicate substantial changes may be made in the plans either the County or the Union may request a reopening of the contract as to those health or dental benefits only.

 H. Effective July I 213 or with the date of the new plan implementation in 213 whichever is later each bargaining unit employee who receives insurance benefits (health care dental or vision) shall contribute the following percentages of his or her base salary towards the premium for each contract year  213  214  2  2.25  I  I  215  216  I  2.25  2.5  I  Contributions shall be made by paycheck deduction. (2 I 4 award)  I. Vision Insurance Effective October l 1984 the County shall provide and pay one hundred percent (1) of all insurance costs for a vision care program providing the same benefits and levels thereof as are now provided under the Collective Bargaining Agreement with its Police Department employees. (1984 award).

J.

 Medical Coverage at Retirement l. Medical coverage shall be provided for any member of the bargaining unit or spouse who at the time of retirement is subject to all of the following conditions (I) The member is not employed or self-employed or member is employed but has no medical coverage available through that employment (214 award) (2) The member is not eligible for Medicare (3) The member has no private medical insurance coverage and (4) The member does not have coverage with spouse.

 For that coverage the County shall contribute 8 percent of the annual cost of coverage and the retired bargaining unit member shall contribute 2 percent. (1992 award).

a. The monthly Ten Dollar ($1.) health fee is waived for the retired member. (1993 tlemorandum of Understanding).

29  b. In the event that the legislature amends the County Code to permit a reduction in the age andor service requirements for full retirement the Agreement will be reopened to address a potential reduction in the age and service requirements for full retirement and on the issue of post-retirement health care.

(23 award).

c. fas a result of litigation legislation or other circumstances bargaining unit members become entitled to receive a regular pension at a different age or with fewer years of service than the current pension plan the parties agree to reopen the collective bargaining agreement to negotiate andor arbitrate under Act 111 the issue of retiree hospitalization etc. pursuant to Article XVII (7).

d. Arbitrator Elliot Newman retains jurisdiction in the event that arbitration is requested by either party. (23 award).

K. Cost Containment It is specifically understood that during the term of this Agreement the County shall have the right to institute delete or modify the full range of wellness and all cost containment measures in hospitalization surgical major medical and dental coverage. The program shall be at no additional cost to employees (other than the 9-1 participation arrangement for the Concordia Flex plan) and benefits shall not be reduced. (198 4 award).

 L. Bonus In Lieu of Benefits Employees eligible for andor rece1vmg Allegheny County Health-Care benefits by virtue of their relationship to another County employee shall not be eligible for the Health-Care Waiver program. This provision shall be effective only upon implementation of this limitation upon non-union employees.

M. Wellness Incentives The Wellness Program shall continue to include the incentive of a $125 bonus or an extra day off as determined by the Department.

 (Sec1ions 8. C. D. E F G. and Hin this secion are from the 29 cnvard. Sections Land Mare from the 2 I-I award)  3  ARTICLE XVII NON-DISCRIMINATION Both the County and the Union agree that there will be no discrimination for or against any employee covered by this Agreement and incorporated Awards in violation of State and Federal laws and regulations. The use of the male or female gender of nouns or pronouns in this Agreement is not intended to describe any specific employee or group of employee but it is intended to refer to all employees regardless of sex. It is agreed that any alleged violation of this Article cannot be resolved through the binding arbitration provisions of the grievance procedure.

 31  ARTICLE XVlll TUITION REIMBURSEMENT Tuition reimbursement for college or university courses effective July I 1991 A. I for job-related courses.

B. 5 for non-job-related courses which are required to complete degree requirements in a field of study that is job-related.

(he language from this Article is from 1he I 989 award.)  32  ARTICLE XIX RIGHTS TO I FORMATION Upon request the County and the Union will furnish to each other non-confidential information relating to collective bargaining matters and the processing of grievances in accordance with the law. Such information will be provided within a reasonable period of time.

 33  ARTICLE XXSENIORITY 1. It is agreed that seniority rights shall not apply under after six (6) months of continuous employment however after six (6) months of continuous employment seniority rights shall revert to and be considered to have been in full force and effect from the beginning  of continuous employment.

2. Except in the case of the Chief or Deputy Chief of Detectives in all cases or promotion to any specialized new positions lay-off recall and leave-of-absence of regular employees the County and the District Attorneys office agree to take into consideration the employees qualifications and seniority A. Seniority is the status secured by length of continuous service to which certain rights accrue to a regular employee.

B. Specifically in the event a new position is to be filled or department is created those who apply for any new position shall be given consideration in the following manner I. Candidates performing these the preference  who are most qualified and who are most capable of the work of the new job will be considered. Among employee with the greatest seniority will be given if his credentials are demonstrably equal to or better  than those of the other candidates.

 (The language in this Article is from the 2 award.)  34  Article XXI FAIR SHARE 1. Each nonmember in the bargaining unit represented by the Union shall be required to pay a fair share fee as provided for by Act 399 of 1993.

2. The County and the Union agree to comply with all provisions of said law.

3. The Union agrees to extend to all nonmembers the opportunity to join the Union.

4. If any legal action is brought against the County as a result of any actions it is requested to perform by the Union pursuant to this Article the Union agrees to provide for the defense of Allegheny County at the Unions expense and through counsel selected by the Union. Allegheny County agrees to give the Union immediate notice of any such legal action brought against it and agrees to cooperate fully with the Union in the defense of the case. If Allegheny County does not fully cooperate with the Union any obligation of the Union to provide a defense under this Article shall cease.

5. The Union agrees in any action so defended to indemnify and hold Allegheny County harmless for any monetary damages the County might be liable for as a consequence of its compliance with this Article except that it is expressly understood that this save harmless provision will not apply to any legal action which may arise as a result of any willful misconduct by Allegheny County as a resuJt of the Countys failure to properly perform its obligation under this Article.

6. The Employer agrees to deduct a fair share fee monthly from all employees m the bargaining unit ho are not members of the Union.

7. Authorization from nonmembers to deduct fair share fee shall not be required. The amounts to be deducted shall be certified to the Employer by the Union and the aggregate deductions of all employees shall be remitted together with an itemized statement to the Union by the last day of the succeeding month after such deductions are made. This information shall be furnished to the County on an annual basis.

 (The language in this Article is from the 2 award.)  35  
