  AGREEMENT  This Agreement made the 1st day of January 219 by and between the Borough of Brackenridge a municipal corporation having its principal office located at 1 Brackenridge Avenue Brackenridge Pennsylvania hereinafter referred to as the Borough  AND  All full-time employee members of the Police Department of the Borough of Brackenridge including the Chief hereinafter referred to as the Police andor Officer.  The term Officer shall include the Chief of Police unless specifically indicated otherwise.  This Agreement includes contract items negotiated agreed upon and specifically identified as pertaining to officers hired after January 1 1993.  This Agreement specifically and expressly excludes part-time police officers.

 WHEREAS by law and more specifically by Act No. 111 approved June 24 1968 the Borough and the Police are authorized to enter into collective bargaining and  WHEREAS the Borough and the Police have been parties to an interest arbitration case no. 55-36-27-96 which terms and conditions of their employment including inter alia compensation pension working conditions and other benefits have been incorporated herein.

 NOW THEREFORE intending to be legally bound hereby the parties hereto agree as follows  ARTICLE I.   YEARLY WAGES  SECTION 1.  Council may at its option create and fill the ranks of Captain and Sergeant following standard Civil Service guidelines.  Police officers shall be paid a base rate as stated hereafter              Effective January 1 219 Chief of Police                         $ 35.87 per hour Captain                                         $ 34.74 per hour Sergeant             $ 33.61 per hour             Patrol Officer$ 31.1 per hour              Effective January 1 22 Chief of Police                         $ 35.87 per hour Captain                                         $ 34.74 per hour Sergeant             $ 33.61 per hour             Patrol Officer$ 31.1 per hour             Effective January 1 221       Chief of Police                         $ 36.37 per hour Captain                                         $ 35.24 per hour Sergeant             $ 34.11 per hour             Patrol Officer$ 31.6 per hour  Effective January 1 222       Chief of Police                         $ 37.22 per hour Captain                                         $ 36.9 per hour Sergeant             $ 34.96 per hour             Patrol Officer$ 32.45 per hour  Effective January 1 223       Chief of Police                         $ 38.7 per hour Captain                                         $ 36.94 per hour Sergeant             $ 35.81 per hour             Patrol Officer$ 33.3 per hour           SECTION   2.  Any Officer who works in any work week shall be guaranteed forty (4) hours of work for that week.

 SECTION  3.  The following payments will be made for longevity        After 1 Years of Service                 $ 22. per year After 15 Years of Service                 $ 28. per year After 2 Years of Service                 $ 34. per year  SECTION  4.  The average hourly rate shall be calculated by dividing base pay plus longevity by 28.

 SECTION  5.  Newly hired officers will start at 65 of Patrol Officer salary and will work up to full Patrol Officers salary in five yearly steps. 65 72 8 9 and 1  ARTICLE II.SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL  All Police shall receive shift differential of seventy-five ($.75) cents per hour on the 2 p.m. to 1 p.m. shift and eighty-five ($.85) cents per hour on the 1 p.m. to 6 a.m. shift.

 Shift differential will be paid during the above referred to shifts and will be considered the regular rates on those shifts when computing overtime pay at time and one half or holiday pay.

  ARTICLE III.SUNDAY PREMIUM  SECTION 1.  Each officer shall be paid a premium of fifty (5) percent based on the regular rate including shift differential of the shift work for working Sunday.  This does not apply to Sundays falling on holidays which will be paid at holiday pay rate heretofore established.

 SECTION 2.  For the purpose of this provision Sunday shall be deemed to be the twenty-four (24) hour period beginning with the shift starting nearest 12 oclock Midnight Sunday morning and extending until 12 oclock Midnight Monday morning.

 ARTICLE IV.OVERTIME  SECTION 1.  The work week shall be defined as five (5) consecutive eight (8) hour days Monday through Friday or   The work week shall be defined as five (5) eight (8) hours days of the calendar week beginning Sunday through Saturday.

 This provides the basis for calculation of and payment for overtime and allowed time.

 SECTION 2.  Full-time officers including the Chief of Police shall have first choice of any and all non-scheduled overtime to include special events details personal days and sick days in order of lowest man in overtime.  All vacation days are to be filled by the floating officer first part-time officers second.  In the event that the floating officer or the part-time officer is not available the shift may be filled with a full-time officer.    SECTION 3.  The Officers and Chief shall be compensated at time and one-half for all hours worked as follows  A.  In excess of eight (8) hours within a twenty-four (24) hour period or  B.  Hours worked in excess of forty (4) hours in a week.

 C.  When required to work on a normally scheduled day off.

 SECTION 4.  Any shift compensated for but not worked shall not count as time worked toward overtime.

 SECTION 5.  Call Out - Any time worked up to two (2) hours shall be paid for two hours and between two (2) and four (4) hours shall be paid for four (4) hours.

 SECTION 6.  Overtime shall not be pyramided.

  ARTICLE V.PERSONAL DAYS  All officers shall be allowed five (5) personal days to be taken in accordance with this article.  Each year personal days are to taken at the officers discretion when the following requirements are as follows  A.  A twenty-four (24) hour prior notice in writing.

B.  Approval must be given by the Chief or the Mayor.

C.  The only exception to A and B would be if the days are used for illness.

D.  Officer shall be paid for any personal day not taken due to denial of use by the         Borough  ARTICLE VI.HOLIDAYS  SECTION 1.  All Police shall receive holiday pay for each of the following holidays not actually worked irrespective of the day of the week on which the holiday may fall  New Years Day          Independence Day          Christmas Eve Easter                           Labor Day                      Christmas Memorial Day              Thanksgiving Day         Good Friday             Officers Birthday  SECTION 2.

 A.  Officers working on the holiday shall receive two and one-half times compensation for all hours worked.

 B.  If the Officer is scheduled off and doesnt work he shall receive holiday pay which is eight (8) hours at straight time.

 SECTION 3.  Police must work the last scheduled work day prior to the holiday and the first scheduled work day following the holiday to receive holiday pay unless he reports off with good cause.              SECTION 4.  If the holiday falls on the Officers scheduled work day the Officer must work the day as scheduled in order to be compensated as per Section 2.A. If it becomes impossible for the Officer to work the scheduled holiday work shift and a replacement can be found by the Chief of the Mayor the Officer reporting off will be compensated as per Section 2.B. and the replacement Officer will be scheduled by the Chief of Mayor.  If the Chief cannot find a replacement the Officer must work his schedule.

      ARTICLE VII.  VACATION  SECTION 1.  The Police shall receive paid vacations as follows                          Years of ServiceVacation Entitlement      1-2 years 5 days      3-5 years1 days     6-9 years15 days 1-15 years2 days 16-2 years25 days 21    years3 days          SECTION 2.    A.  Notification to the Chief or Mayor in writing at least two (2) weeks prior to a change in vacation shall be required unless due to an emergency which is approved by the Chief of Mayor.

 B.  Vacations will so far as practical be granted at times most desired by the Officers.

 1.  Longer service Officers will be given preference as to choice.

 2.  The final right to allot vacation periods and to change such allotment is exclusively reserved to the Borough in order to insure the orderly operation of the Borough.

 3.  Vacations may be taken any time during the calendar year.

 C.  The vacation must be scheduled to consist of at least five consecutive work days or a multiple of five except as follows  Ten days of each Officers vacation (except those getting only one week in that calendar year) may be split as to the Officers preference providing at least 48 hours written request be submitted and approved by the Chief or Mayor and may be granted by the Chief or Mayor in less time provided he can fill the shift.

 ARTICLE VIII.  SICK DAYS  SECTION 1.  Each Officer hired prior to January 1 1993 shall be entitled to twelve (12) sick days per calendar year and said sick days shall be permitted to be accumulated to a maximum of one hundred twenty (12) days.

 A.  Sick days shall mean working days and not scheduled days off.

 B.  A doctors excuse will be required for absences due to illness or incident after three (3) consecutive work days missed.  The doctors excuse shall be required upon return the fourth day.

 SECTION 2.  Upon retirement each officer hired before January 1 1993 shall be entitled to receive a full days pay for each accumulated sick day at the date of this retirement.  This provision shall not apply to involuntary discharge or voluntary resignation from the force.  It shall only apply to a situation where a normal retirement occurs.

 SECTION 3.  Officers hired after January 1 1993 shall be entitled to twelve (12) sick days per calendar year and said days may accrue to a total of 9 days.  Upon normal retirement any unused days the officer accumulated shall be entitled to receive a full days pay for each accumulated sick day at the date of retirement.

             SECTION 4.  It is not the intention of Section 1. to give Police Officers additional time off.  If the Borough feels a Police Officer is using sick leave for this purpose the Borough may require a doctors excuse.  The Borough shall pay for a physical examination if requested by the Employer.

 ARTICLE IX.  WITNESS FEES AND COURT APPEARANCES  SECTION 1.  When court is attended by an Officer or Chief  A.  If the Officer or Chief is scheduled for Court time on scheduled shift off he shall be paid time and one-half for all hours worked.

 B.  The Officer or Chief shall use the unmarked police car if available.

 C.  If the extra police car is not available the Officer or Chief shall receive five (5) gallons of gasoline.

 D.  The Officer or Chief shall be reimbursed for parking fees with receipts and receive up to ten ($1.) dollars meal allowance with receipts.   E.  If a Magistrates hearing is attended on the Officers or Chiefs scheduled shift off he will receive three (3) hours pay.

 SECTION 2.  If the Officer or Chief is scheduled 6 - 2 or 2 - 1 shift on a day he is to appear in court he will be given that shift off with pay.   ARTICLE X.  JURY DUTY  Any Police Officer serving as a juror in the Court of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Federal Court or Grand Juries shall be entitled to their court pay in addition to their full wage for the first three (3) days.  Any employee serving as a juror for four (4) or more days shall be entitled to the difference in money between that which would have been payable to him and that which was paid to him for jury duty.

 ARTICLE XI.  MILITARY RESERVE AND NATIONAL GUARD DUTY  The Borough shall pay the regular salary to any officer that attends the annual training required by the military up to a maximum of fifteen (15) working days.

 ARTICLE XII.  UNIFORM ALLOWANCE  SECTION 1.  Each Police Officer shall receive a uniform allowance up to $6. per calendar year.

 A.  The Borough will provide the following equipment  Belts          Hand Cuffs          Cuff Cases          Uniform Hats Holsters     Badges                Flashlights  Service pistol will be made available  Night Sticks and or PR-24 Sticks  Bullet-Proof Vests (Body Armor)  Chemical Maces when necessary  ARTICLE XIII.  FUNERAL DAYS  SECTION 1.  Each Officer shall be entitled to a maximum of three (3) days off with pay for the purpose of attending a funeral including visitation in funeral home or any person within said Officers immediate family.

       The immediate family consists of  Father                               Sister                           Grandparents Mother                             Brother                         Mother-in-law Husband                           Son                               Father-in-law Wife                                 Daughter                       Mother of Children             SECTION  2.  Each officer shall be entitled to one (1) funeral day for sister-in law or brother-in-law.

     ARTICLE XIV.  INSURANCE  It is agreed that the present system providing for sick leave disability allowance insurance hospitalization and medical provisions and the present pension system shall remain in full force and effect to the extent as they now exist consisting of  A.  Each officer will receive the following  Highmark PPO Blue PPO Blue Prescription PPO Blue Premium Dental Plan AFSCME Eye Care                         $55. Life Insurance                         The amount of Disability Insurance shall be $2. per month$5                           per week for all officers.

             False Arrest coverage will continue to be provided as was provided during             1988.                                     B.      All new officers hired shall be provided with the following after three (3) full months of employment        Highmark PPO Blue PPO Blue Prescription PPO Blue Premium Dental Plan                         AFSCME Eye Care                         $55 Life Insurance                          The amount of Disability Insurance shall be $2. per month$5 per                          week for all officers.

                        False arrest coverage will continue to be provided as was provided during 1988                C.     All officers will pay $4. a pay towards benefits.

   D.The Borough shall be entitled to switch healthcare plans or providers provided the new plan provides equivalent or better coverage. The term equivalent in the context does not mean exactly the same. In the event the Borough elects to unilaterally change healthcare providers the Borough shall be responsible to reimburse the employee for any increase in deductibles that result from the change.

 ARTICLE XV.  LEGAL AID  The Borough of Brackenridge is responsible for any and all legal fees needed by an Officer that while in the performance of his or her duties is brought to Court for criminal andor civil charges and false arrest.

 ARTICLE XVI.  POLICE MANAGEMENT  The Chief of Police as a member of Borough Police Management shall be removed from the Police Bargaining Unit but shall retain the right to rejoin the Police Bargaining Unit with no loss of seniority upon voluntarily or involuntarily vacating the position of Chief of Police.  The Chief of Police will remain on the 21 turn (4crew) schedule including the 6th day and Sunday.

 ARTICLE XVII.  PENSION  SECTION 1.

             A.  The Officers will receive a bi-annual statement of assets andor expenditures  B.  The Officers shall appoint a pension representative who will be one of the Officers.

 C.  The basis for calculating retirement benefits shall be a monthly pension benefit equal to 5 of the members average monthly salary during the last 36 months of employment in accordance with Act 6.

              D.   Retirement benefits will be increased from fifty (5) percent to the maximum percentage allowed by law.

  E.  The Officers retirement benefits shall be based upon the percentage of total wages not base pay.

              F.  If Officers have to contribute into the pension plan officers will pay into the fund monthly an amount not to exceed 5 percent on all compensation in accordance with the borough ordinance.

 G.  Officers shall be permitted to obtain the best pension package available at the time.

  H.   A lifetime survivors benefit must be provided to the surviving spouse (or if no spouse survives or if he or she subsequently dies the child or children under 18 years of age or if attending college under or attaining the age of twenty three (23) of no less than 5 of the pension the member was receiving or would have been entitle to receive had he been retired at the time of death.  (Attending college shall mean the eligible children are registered at an accredited institution of higher learning and are carrying a minimum course load of 7 credit hours per semester.)                              I.   Compliance with all mandatory requirement of Act 3.

 J. Compliance with all mandatory requirements of Act 6.

                 K.   The service increment will be a maximum of $5. per month after five years of service in excess of 25 years.

 SECTION 2.  Any and all of the above provisions are contingent upon being found to be actuarially sound and their implementation will result in no cost to the Borough.

 SECTION 3.  The actuarial determination for these benefits will be made at the next regularly scheduled actuarial review.

 ARTICLE XVIII.  SCHEDULING  A.  Each Police Officer shall rotate among the various shifts on as equal a basis as possible.

 B.  Full-time officers will have first choice of any and all duties and work except those scheduling matters specifically addressed by Article IV Section 2 which shall control those scheduling matters.

 C.  The Chief will be part of any rotating manning schedule as established by the Mayor along with all other Officers.

 D.  Full-time officers hired prior to January 1 212 shall stay on a 21 turn  (4 crew) schedule that has been regularly worked including the regularly scheduled 6th day and Sunday.  Full-time officers hired after January 1 212 shall be scheduled at the discretion of the Mayor or Chief of Police.

 ARTICLE XIX.  GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE  SECTION 1.  A grievance is defined as an allegation that there has been a violation misinterpretation or misapplication of any of the provisions of this Agreement.

 SECTION 2.  A grievance Officer may be appointed by the Police.  The Mayor and Police Committee shall be informed who the grievance Officer is.

 SECTION 3.  A grievance shall be made in writing and given to the Mayor.  Within ten (1) days the Mayor shall issue a written decision.

 SECTION 4.  If the decision of the Mayor is not satisfactory to the party or parties involved they shall within seven (7) days state their grievance in writing to Council.  Council shall issue a written decision within ten (1) days.

 SECTION 5.  A grievance which is not settled in Section 4 above may be appealed by either party to arbitration before an impartial Arbitrator selected through the American Arbitration Association.  The decision of the Arbitrator shall be binding on the parties each party shall bear the expense of the presentation of its case.  The expense of the employment of the Arbitrator shall be shared equally by the parties to the Arbitration.

 SECTION 6.  A grievance not answered within the time limits specified above will automatically be moved to the next step.

 SECTION 7.  A grievance not appealed to the next step within the time limits specified above shall be considered settled on the basis of the last answer of the Borough or its representative.

 SECTION 8.  Additional time at a specified step of the procedure may be granted by mutual agreement between the parties.

 ARTICLE XX.  PAST PRACTICE  All existing conditions of work past practices and benefits not in conflict with this agreement shall continue in effect.  Provided however that the events supporting the practice must have occurred since January 1 1984.

 ARTICLE XXI.  POLICE MERGER CLAUSE  If there is a merger of the police department with another municipality or municipalities andor if this department were dissolved andor abolished123 andor in the event that such a merger does not succeed the members of the Brackenridge Police Department must be reinstated to the Borough of Brackenridge Police Department on the basis of seniority before any other person(s) can be employed in the Brackenridge Borough Police Department.  All police officers who are reinstated shall be compensated in accordance with the terms and conditions of employment that formerly existed before the Borough entered into a merger.  If a merger is implemented by the Borough then said officers of the bargaining unit shall be compensated at a rate which is not less than their current rate.

 ARTICLE XXII.  JOB SECURITY         SECTION 1.  Brackenridge Borough cannot employ a part-time Police Officer while there is a full-time Police Officer laid off.  A part-time Officer is defined in Section 1195 (4) of the Borough Code (defined in code as Special Police).

 ARTICLE XXIII.  JUST CAUSE  SECTION 1.  An Officer shall not be suspended discharged or disciplined in any fashion without just or proper cause.

 SECTION 2.  Any charges against any officer including the Chief shall be stated in writing by the individual making such charge and said charges shall be stated clearly in detail and must be submitted in writing to the Mayor the Police committee and all of Council.

 ARTICLE XXIV.   EARLY CALL-OUT  SECTION 1.  An Early Call-Out occurs when a Police Officer is called out to work andor is scheduled to work a shift that occurs within 16 hours of the last full shift worked by said Police Officer.

 SECTION 2.  Any Police Officer required to work within the time period defined above and constituting an Early Call-Out within the definition of this Article will receive time and one-half (1-12) for said shift.

             SECTION 3.  Excluded from this Article are shifts worked as a result of a convenience change for which the Police Officer would receive only straight pay.  Also excluded from this Article and its sections is the shift following the Early Call-Out shift.  The Police Officer will receive straight pay for the follows an Early Call-Out shift as defined by Section 1 of the Article.

 ARTICLE XXV. IRA  Each Officer shall receive ten ($.1) cents per hour for all hours worked that shall be deposited into an IRA of their choosing.  The amount shall be included in his gross pay and all withholding taxes paid by the Officer.

 ARTICLE XXVI.  RETIREE MAJOR MEDICAL  The Borough shall pay 1 of a retirees Major Medical Insurance.  The retiree will be responsible for paying the balance of the premium.  This provision will apply only to an Officer who retires after the effective date of this contract and will not apply to a spouse or other dependents.

 ARTICLE XXVII. RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT  Officers hired shall be required after one (1) full year of employment to establish residency within 1 air miles of the Borough within (3) days.

 ARTICLE XXVIII.  SOCIAL SECURITY  To the extent permitted by law Officers covered under this agreement shall be permitted to prospectively pay into and receive Social Security.  The Borough shall contact Social Security to arrange for any process required in an effort to effectuate this provision.

    XXIX.  UNION DUES        SECTION 1.The Employer agrees to deduct monthly union dues from the last pay each month for any Bargaining Unit Employee and to send such dues to the Secretary-Treasurer of the Union on or before the end of the month for which the deduction is made.                SECTION 2.  When a full-time member of the collective bargaining unit declines to join the Union he shall nevertheless be assessed a fair share fee as defined in the Public Employee Fair Share Fee Law 43 P.S. Section 112.1 et seq. The Union shall determine the fee in accordance with and follow all procedures established by the Public Employee Fair Share Fee Law 43 P.S. Sec. 112.1 et seq.   ARTICLE XXX.  TERM  This contract shall remain in full force and effect for the years January 1 219 through December 31 223.

   IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties have hereunto set their hands and seals the day and year first above written for themselves their successors and assigns.

 BOROUGH OF BRACKENRIDGE                           BOROUGH OF BRACKENRIDGE Mayor and Council                                                      Police Officers                                                                                                                       Attest                                                                                         dont think they realized how popular the concept of police abolition would become when they chose this verbiage I mean it is literally saying if the police get abolished and reinstated you have to rehire the same people so it may be prescient instead 2 real     Page  of      
