BEFORE MUNICIPAL COUNCIL OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF MONROEVILLE 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF  )  
MONROEVILLE AUTHORIZING THE PROPER  )  
OFFICIALS OF MONROEVILLE TO ENTER INTO  )  
A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT  )  ORDINANCE NO.  2715  
WITH THE POLICE DEPARTMENT WAGE  )  
POLICY COMMITTEE OF THE MUNICIPALITY  )  
OF MONROEVILLE  )  

BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Municipality of Monroeville, in Council assembled as follows: 
SECTION 1. The proper officials of the Municipality of Monroeville are hereby authorized to enter a Collective Bargaining Agreement with the Police Depaitment Wage Policy Committee, said Agreement to be effective January 1, 2019. 
SECTION 2. A copy of the Agreement is attached hereto, made a part hereof and marked "Exhibit A." 
ORDAINED AND ENACTED this 10th day of December, 2019. 
(SEAL) 
ATTEST: MUNICIPALITY OF MONROEVILLE 
~~~A J
~ J , /j~. 
Timofuyiltl 

Municipal Manager Mayor 
ENTERED INTO LEGAL BOOK ON: December 20, 2019 
2019-2022 LABOR AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE MUNICIPALITY OF MONROEVILLE AND MONROEVILLE POLICE DEPARTMENT WAGE/POLICY COMMITTEE (PF-R-86-85-W) COVERING THE YEARS JANUARY 1, 2019 TO DECEMBER 31, 2022 
{DocNo=004S7489. l } 

15.4. INDEX 
Ordinance Agreement 4 Witnesseth 4 Article I. Recognition 4 Article II. Management Rights 5 Article III. Rights of the Wage Policy Committee and Members of the Monroeville Police Department 5 Article IV. Wages 7 
1. Patrolman Classification 8 
2. Additional Police Classification 9 
3. Specialist Pay 9 
4. Shift Differential 9 
5. Longevity Payment 9 
6. Supervisor Pay 9 
Article V. Overtime 9 
1. Overtime Work 9 
2. Overtime Rate 9 
3. Appropriate Hourly Rate 10 
4. Overtime Scheduled By Classification 10 
5. Overtime Option 10 
6. Accumulated Compensatory Time 10 
7. Use of Compensatory Time 10 
8. Overtime Utilization Policy 11 
Article VI Vacation 13 
1. Accrued Vacation 13 
2. Annual Vacation Schedule 13 
3. Block Week Vacation Scheduling 14 
4. Vacation Quotas 14 
5. Vacation Request on a Holiday 14 
Article VII Holidays and Personal Days 14 
1. Holidays 14 
2. Personal Holidays 14 
3. Anniversary Date and Birthday 15 
4. Holiday Pay 15 
5. Special Detail on Official Holiday 15 
Article VIII Sick/Injury Leave 15 
1. Sick Leave 15 
2. Short Term Disability 16 
Article IX Bereavement Leave 17 
1. Immediate Family 17 
2. Near Family 17 
3. Other Family Members 17 
{DocNo=00457489 I ) 
Article X 
1. 
2. 
Article XI 
Article XII 
1. 
2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 
Article XIII 
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 
11. 
Article XIV 
1. 
2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 
Article XV 1. 2. 3. 
Article XVI Article XVII 

Additional Leave 17 
Additional Leave 17 Family/Medical Leave Act 17 
Modified Duty Work Assignment 18 Insurance 18 
Health Care 18 Health Care Rebate Program 19 Life Insurance 19 Non-Work Related Long Term Disability Insurance 19 Po1ice Professiona] Liabi]ity Insurance 20 Reimbursement of Legal Defense Costs 20 
Pension Retirement 20 
Pension Eligibility 20 Pension Contributions 20 Calculation of Pension Benefits 20 Service Increments 21 Social Security Offset 21 Survivor Benefits 21 Pension Vesting 22 Use ofMilitary Service Time 22 Work Related Disability Pension 22 Health Care Benefits for Retirees and Spouse 23 Life Insurance for Retirees 24 
Clothing, Uniform, Equipment and Maintenance Allowance 24 Clothing, Uniform, Equipment and Maintenance Allowance 24 New Hires 24 Extra-Ordinary Uniform Cost 24 Article Damage 24 Safety Equipment 24 Soft Body Armor 24 Prescription Eyeglass Inserts 25 
Court Appearance 25 Court Appearance 25 Off Duty Court Appearance Compensation 25 Court Appearance 25 
Grievance Procedure and Arbitration 25 Safety and Health 27 
Article XVIII Past Practice 27 Article XIX Duration and Termination 28 Appendix A 29 
{DocNo-00457489.1 } 

AGREEMENT 
THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into as of the 1st day of January, 2019, by and between the Municipality ofMonroeville, Pennsylvania, a municipal subdivision ofthe Commonwealth ofPennsy]vania, hereinafter designated as the "Municipality", and the Wage Policy Committee of the Monroeville Police Department, hereinafter referred to as "Wage Po1icy Committee". 

WITNESSETH: 
WHEREAS, the parties hereto are bound by the act ofthe Pennsylvania Legislature, being Act No. 111 ofthe regular 1968 Session entitled, 11Police and Firemen Co1lective Bargaining Act; and 
WHEREAS, a more than 51 percent ofthe members ofthe Police Department have pursuant to Section 1 ofAct No. 111 designated the "Wage Policy Committee" ofthe Monroeville Police Department to negotiate on behalf ofall the members ofthe Department with the Municipality regarding all matters related to wages, salaries, hours, fringe benefits, grievances and working conditions of their employment; and 
WHEREAS, the parties through their designated representatives, have bargained collectively regarding wages and other conditions of employment, pursuant to the binding arbitration section of Act 111; and 
NOW THEREFORE, This contract, in consideration of the mutual promises and in consideration of the following agreements by and between the Municipality ofMonroeville and the Wage Policy Committee do hereby agree with each other as follows: 

ARTICLE I RECOGNITION 
1. 
The Municipality hereby recognizes the Wage Policy Committee as the sole and exclusive collective bargaining representative for wage and other terms and conditions of employment pursuant to the Certification of Representation by the Pennsylvania Labor Re]ations Board, in accordance with Act 111 and the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Act, in Case No. PF-R-86-85-W dated October 29, 1986, for all regular sworn police officers ofthe Monroeville Police Department from the rank ofprobationary patrol officer through the rank of Lieutenant, and excluding all management level employees. 

2. 
The Employer agrees that it will not enter into any written or oral agreement with any employees covered by this agreement which is inconsistent with or which in any way modifies or waives any provision ofthis agreement. 


(DocNo=00457489.1 ) 
ARTICLE II MANAGEMENT RIGHTS 
1. Except to the extent expressly abridged by a specific provision of this Agreement, or the express provision of the Home Rule Charter, the Municipality reserves and retains the sole and exclusive right to operate, manage and direct the police depatiment and its regular police force, as such rights existed prior to the execution of this or any other previous agreement with the Wage Policy Committee. It is understood and agreed that all management rights repose in the Municipality, and such rights must be exercised consistently with the other provisions of this Agreement. These rights include but are not limited to the following: 
A. The right to direct employees of the Department. 
B. The right to hire, promote, and retain employees in a position within the Department, and to suspend, demote, discharge, or take other disciplinary action against employee, except as limited by applicable laws and Civil Service regulations and to set standards with respect to these rights. 
C. The right to relieve employees from duties in conformance with the Civil Service rules and regulations as outlined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. 
D. The right to maintain efficiency of the Department and to set standards for the safety of the public. 
2. The Wage Policy Committee and on behalf of the employees, agrees to cooperate with the Employer to attain and maintain service and efficiency. 

ARTICLE III RIGHTS OF THE WAGE POLICY COMMITTEE AND MEMBERS OF THE MONROEVILLE POLICE DEPARTMENT 
1. 
The Municipality shall make every effort to permit, when on duty, the members of the Wage Policy Committee to attend all special meetings of the committee and to meet with individual officers during his or their tour of duty when required. In no event shall these meetings interfere with the emergency operations of the police department. 

2. 
The Municipality shall take due caution and care to protect the rights of individual officers in any administrative proceedings that might result in criminal charges or disciplinary action being filed against an individual officer. The Municipality shall give the officer the right to have legal counsel before making any statement, which is in addition to his/her normal police report. The Municipality shall not suspend, demote, or otherwise discipline an officer without just cause. The officer shall have the right to grieve any disciplinary actions under this Article including matters of suspension, demotion, or discharge. 

3. 
Suspensions, charges and specifications and all references thereto shall be removed from the personnel jackets ofthe members after a period ofthree (3) years from the date ofoccurrence. 


{DocNo=00457489.I J 
4. 
Those members serving as officers in the recognized collective Bargaining Unit for Monroeville Police Officers or serving as an officer in any police fraternal organization shall receive necessary time off without loss of scheduled pay to attend meetings, conventions or any other meetings that are scheduled or called for emergency purposes. Any expenses incurred while attending such gathering shall be borne by the officer. Also, the officer must give due and timely notice of such events. 

5. 
Words used in the Agreement in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and the neuter. 

6. 
Payment of wages to the members ofthe bargaining unit shall be biweekly in accordance with present practice. If the scheduled pay day falls on a holiday provided for in this Agreement, all employees shall be paid before quitting time on the day preceding said holiday. The pay stubs must be so issued that the employee may retain said stub for his permanent record and must c1ear1y list the following: Employer's name, employee's name, period worked, hours worked, gross wages, itemized deductions, and net pay. Payment of wages may be by direct deposit ACH. 

7. 
The Wage Policy Committee shall have the privilege of using designated bulletin boards for the purpose of informing employees of official Bargaining unit meetings, functions, affairs, and elections. 


8. Police Officer's Bill of Rights ­
Any complaint against a Police Officer must be in writing and signed by the complainant and delivered to the Municipality. The complainant must be willing to confront the accused Police Officer with regard to the complaint. At any meeting involving both the accused officer and the complainant, the Municipal Manager, Chief of Police, or the Assistant Chief of Police must be in attendance. 
1. 
When an anonymous complaint is made against a Police officer and no corroborative evidence is obtained, the complaint shall be classified as unfounded. 

2. 
When a citizen complaint is filed greater than three (3) months after the date of the alleged event complained of, which if true could not lead to a criminal charge, then such complaint shall be classified as unfounded. 

3. 
Ifa Police officer is interviewed as part of an internal investigative or disciplinary procedure, and writes a statement as part of that investigation, or a transcript is taken or other mechanical record is made, of statements provided by the Police Officer, then a copy of the same must be given to the interviewed Police Officer, without cost or delay, upon request of said Police Officer or representative thereof. 

4. 
Ifany Police Officer under interrogation is in any type of custody, he shall be completely informed of all his rights under Miranda prior to the commencement of the interrogation. 


!DocNo=004S7489.1 l 
5. 
Any Police Officer under interrogation for the purpose ofan internal investigation that may or may not lead to crimina] charges shall be completely informed ofhis rights under Garrity. 

6. 
At the request ofany Police Officer under interrogation, he sha1l have the right to be represented by a member ofthe Wage/Policy Committee, who shall remain present at all times during the interrogation. The interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonable amount oftime until such representation can be obtained. 


9. Bidding of Shifts 
A. For Police Officers hired on or after April 6, 2016, the Chief ofPolice shall have discretion to schedule these officers throughout the department regardless oftheir seniority for the first twenty-four (24) months oftheir employment, provided such scheduling is not used to discipline the Officers. 
B. All Police Officers shall bid on a shift and relief days according to seniority and will not rotate among other shifts or relief days, except to the extent provided under subpart A or as otherwise provided herein. The bids shall be posted by the Municipality on the first Monday in November and the employees shall have at least three (3) weeks to complete the bidding process, the bids shall then take effect the first pay period in January. 
Except for those officers identified in subpart A, a mandatory change in shift may only take place in the event ofan emergency, which is defined for the purpose ofthis agreement as an unanticipated event that requires immediate police action. In the event a schedule is changed, the changed shift shall be paid at the overtime rate ofpay. This section shall not apply to an officer attending periodic training in which his shift and pass days would need to be changed to allow attendance during a particular training exercise, however, the Municipality shall make every effort to schedule training on the officer's regularly scheduled workday. 
This section shall not restrict the Administration from conducting additional bids throughout the year due to promotions, retirements, officers hired prior to April 6, 2016 being removed from probationary status, or officers having completed their first twenty-four (24) months of employment. 


ARTICLE IV WAGES 
A. Wage Increase -Percentage based on top patrolman's wage as of December 31 of each year, applied across wage scale. See Appendix A. 
Jan.I 2019 Jan. 1 2020 Jan.1 2021 Jan. 1 2022 3.0% 2.75% 3.0% 3.0% 
{DocNo•004S7489.1 ) 
B. Equalize and maintain equal wage scale between the ranks oftop Patrolmen and Lieutenants. 
1. Patrolman Classification 
A. Classification of police patrolman hired prior to April 6, 2016, shall have six (6) pay steps, and employees within such classification shall be eligible for advancement from Step A to Step F as follows: 
STEP A­STEP B ­STEP C ­STEP D­STEP E­STEP F-After six ( 6) months of continuous service in Step A advance to Step B After six (6) months of continuous service in Step B advance to Step C After one (1) year continuous service in Step C advance to Step D After one (1) year continuous service in Step D advance to Step E After one (1) year continuous service in Step E advance to Step F Top Patrolman 
B. Wage Scale for new Police Officers hired prior to April 6, 2016 shall be as follows: 
STEP A­STEP B ­STEP C ­STEP D­STEP E ­STEP F­$25.00 60% of top Patrolman rate 70% oftop Patrolman rate 80% oftop Patrolman rate 90% oftop Patrolman Rate 100% of top Patrolman Rate 
C. For police officers hired on or after April 6, 2016, the classification of police patrolman shall have eight (8) steps and employees within such classification shall be eligible for advancement from Step A to Step F as follows: 
STEP A­STEP B­STEP C­STEP Cl ­STEPD­STEP DI ­STEP E­STEP F-After six ( 6) months of continuous service in Step A advance to Step B After six ( 6) months of continuous service in Step B advance to Step C After one (1) year of continuous service in Step C advance to Step Cl After one (1) year of continuous service in Step C 1 advance to Step D After one (I) year of continuous service in Step D advance to Step D 1 After one (1) year of continuous service in Step D 1 advance to Step E After one (1) year of continuous service in Step E advance to Step F Top Patrolman 
Wage scale for new officers hired on or after April 6, 2016 shall be as follows: 
STEP A­STEP B­STEP C­STEP Cl ­$25 60% of top Patrolman rate 70% of top Patrolman rate 75% of top Patrolman rate 
{DocNo~00457489.1 J 
STEP D­80% of top Patrolman rate STEP DI­85% of top Patrolman rate STEP E­90% oftop Patrolman rate STEP F-I 00% of top Patrolman rate 
2. 
Additional Police Classification -Classifications for police positions other than regular patrolman performing police work other than regular patrol work which shall be created, such as, detective, community safety officer, training officer, juvenile officer and traffic officer shall be appointed from the ranks ofregular police officers. 

3. 
Specialist Pay -Premium pay for persons performing in the capacity of detective, community safety officer, training officer, juvenile officer, traffic officer and school resource officer or other category of special activity designated by the Municipal Manager shall receive $1,800.00 annually for the performance ofthe special detail. This additional $1,800.00 shall be made in two annual installments ofequal amounts. 

4. 
Shift Differential-From January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2016, shift differential shall be $0.70 per hour to be paid to officers working the hours other than 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. Effective January 1, 2017, shift differential shall be $0.85 per hour to be paid to officers working the hours other than 7 :00 am to 3 :00 pm. 

5. 
Longevity Payment -Each police officer who has completed three (3) years of continuous service shall be entitled to a separate annual payment in the pay that is the first pay in December in the amount .10 of 1 % oftop patrolman base annual salary per year of service and for each succeeding year of service per continuous years of service and no cap shall be placed on the number ofyears for which longevity compensation is computed. For officers who are hired after January 1, 2012, longevity will be paid beginning with completion of five (5) years of continuous service. 


6. Supervisor Pay -The following shall be the pay differential for supervisors: 
a. 
Corporals shall be paid an additional $2.00 above the top patrol rate. 

b. 
Sergeants shall be paid an additional $3.00 above the top patrol rate. 

c. 
Lieutenants shall be paid an additional $4.00 above the top patrol rate. 


ARTICLE V OVERTIME 
1. 
Overtime Work -The Municipality shall not hire special police for the express purpose of eliminating overtime for regular full time police officers. Preference shall be given to regular full time police officers regarding all work details, schedules and overtime. 

2. 
Overtime Rate -The Municipality shall pay each police officer one and one half (1-1/2) times his appropriate hourly rate for all hours worked in excess ofeight (8) hours per day or forty ( 40) hours per week. In calculating time worked, all paid time shall be included, whether 


{OocNo·00457489 l } 
the time is actually worked or not. For Police Officers hired on or after April 6, 2016, only time 
actual1y worked shall be used in calculating time worked for purposes of overtime. 
If an officer works an overtime detail and call off sick for his regularly scheduled shift in the same workday, the officer will be compensated at the straight time rate for the overtime detai1. In the event the Police Officer has a legitimate injury or illness and provides written documentation from a doctor then the Officer wi11 be compensated at the appropriate overtime rate of pay. For the purpose of this paragraph, a workday sha11 be defined as a twenty-four hour period beginning at 7:00 a.m. one day and ending at 7:00 a.m. the next day. 
3. 
Appropriate Hourly Rate -The appropriate hourly rate is defined as the regular hourly rate added to all forms of compensation, such as, longevity, shift differential, specialist pay, and all other compensation paid by the Municipality 

4. 
Overtime Scheduled by Classification -Overtime shall be scheduled by particular divisions of the department, i.e., patrol division, detective division, special operations division, and traffic division. Overtime shall be allocated to these respective divisions personnel prior to allowing a person outside ofthe division for which overtime is required to bid on that overtime. Individuals filling a higher classification may be utilized in a lower classification when necessary, but at their current rate of pay. 

5. 
Overtime Option -The Administration will provide officers with the option to receive compensatory time or pay for all overtime hours worked. 

6. 
Accumulated Compensatory Time -Officers shall be allowed to accumulate compensatory time to a maximum of 480 hours. Accumulated compensatory time shall be taken at the time of an officer's retirement or he may elect to receive compensation totaling the dollar value of accumulated compensatory time. All compensatory time over 480 hours is to be scheduled for utilization within a thirty (30) day period of earning said compensatory time. All time not scheduled within thirty (30) days of notification of attaining 480 hours will be forfeited by the employee. It is the employee's responsibility to maintain 480 hours or less. 


All Officers hired after the effective date ofJuly 21, 2005 shall be allowed to accumulate compensatory time to a maximum of three hundred sixty (360) hours. Accumulated compensatory time shall be taken at the time of an officer's retirement or he may elect to receive compensation totaling the dollar value of accumulated compensatory time. All compensatory time over three hundred sixty (360) hours is to be scheduled for utilization within thirty (30) days of earning said compensatory time. All time not scheduled within thirty (30) days of notification of attaining three hundred sixty (360) hours will be forfeited by the employee. It is the employee's responsibility to maintain three hundred sixty (360) hours or less. 
7. Use of Compensatory Time -All compensatory time requests of more than four 
(4) hours will be granted to an employee provided that it does not result in overtime cost to the Municipality. Once compensatory time has been approved it cannot be withdrawn due to others using others types of leaves which causes overtime. No compensatory time will be granted on 
(DocNo=00457489. l J 
Holidays and/or Christmas Eve and New Years Eve. Compensatory time cannot be scheduled more than sixty ( 60) days in advance. 
8. Overtime Utilization Policy ­
Purpose -The purpose of the overtime utilization policy is to provide an equal opportunity for police officers to meet the established replacement needs of the department. Opportunities for overtime are generally elective on the part of the individual officer; however, the administration reserves the right to require (draft) personnel for overtime work based upon the needs of the department except for probationary employees and police officers not assigned to the patrol division. 
Shift Overtime Selection System -All Patro1 Officers will be considered for shift overtime unless they give notification of intention to sign off for the day. Sign off codes must be placed prior to the overtime offer. 
Selection for shift overtime shall be based upon the fo1lowing priorities, day off on the shift assigned and the least recent (o]dest) opportunity. Ifmore than one (1) officer has equal opportunity, and the same call out date, seniority will determine the call out. 
The following priorities will be followed: 
1. 
Days off from the shift with the vacancy, officer with the least recent opportunity 

2. 
Days off from the other two shifts, officer with the least recent opportunity 

3. 
Double out from the shift going off duty, officer with the least recent opportunity 

4. 
Double out from the shift coming on duty following the shift with the vacancy, Officer with the least recent opportunity 

5. 
Agreed to split four hour shift between shift going off duty and the shift coming on Duty 

6. 
Volunteer from any other division before draft 

7. 
Draft the least senior man to the most senior man from the shift going offduty on a Rotating basis 

8. 
Draft Exempt 


A. Probationary employees (except in case of emergency) 
B. Police officers not assigned to the patrol division ( except in case of emergency) 
C. Police officers off duty on the day of the vacancy ( except in case of emergency) 
(DocNo=00457489 1 ) 
Special Detail Overtime Selection System -Special detail overtime is exempt from the shift 
overtime utilization policy. Special detail overtime is defined as any event known at least four 
(4) hours in advance (i.e.: athletic events, mall details, parades, public gatherings, special patrol details, etc.) that normally would involve less than an eight (8) hour overtime period. Special detail overtime shall be rotated equally among the police officers within the department. Both acceptance and non-acceptance of a detail shall be counted as an opportunity, in the number of hours, towards that officer's special detail overtime opportunity hours. 
The following are the exceptions whereby an officer would not be called to work or charged 
with non--acceptance of special detail overtime opportunity hours. 
1. 
The officer is already working his assigned shift, flex shift or another overtime detail 

2. 
The officer is off on paid leave, to include the following: 

a. 
Anniversary 

b. 
Bereavement 

c. 
Birthday 

d. 
Comp time (greater than four hours) 

e. 
Injury 

f. 
Jury Duty 

g. 
Military 

h. 
Paternity 




1. Personal Day 
J. Personal Holiday 
k. 
Sick 

I. 
Vacation 


3. Officers that are off during "Block Weeks" of vacation shall not be called or credited for overtime opportunities during that time. Pass days before; during and after the block weeks of vacation shall be considered vacation for the purposes of this section. 
Special detail opportunities will be logged by the staffing computeri If a special detail overtime shift arises, the most senior officer with the least amount of special detail overtime opportunity hours shall be notified ofthe opportunity. Regardless of whether or not the officer accepts or declines the special detail overtime, he shall be "charged" with the number ofhours for that particular special detail overtime. The next special detail overtime will subsequently be offered first to the next most senior officer with the least amount of special detail overtime opportunity hours. This procedure will be followed from the most senior officer to the least senior officer. Once the list goes from the most senior officer through the least senior officer in the department, the next opportunity shall revert back to the most senior officer with the least amount of special detail overtime opportunity hours and will continue in this manner as special detail overtime opportunities arise. In the event that a newly hired officer becomes eligible to work special detail overtime, he shall receive as his beginning special detail overtime hours the average number of hours accrued by the officers on the list. At the beginning of every calendar year, the number of special detail overtime hours shall revert back to zero for all officers and the process shall begin again from the most senior officer to the least senior officer. 
{DocNo=00457489. I } 
Police Officers shall not be scheduled, called out, or credited for an opportunity to work for a twenty-four (24) hour shift cycle (i.e. 7:00 a.m.-7:00 a.m.) except in the event of an emergency. 
When a Police Officer utilizes sick leave that Officer shall not be eligible for overtime for a sixteen (16) hour period following the shift called off sick, except in the event of an emergency. 
Officers may opt out of the special detail overtime rotation. Officers who wish to not be contacted for special detail overtime shall sign a waiver prior to the start of the calendar year. An Officer who has opted out may be returned to the rotation one time during the calendar year upon notice. Officers returning will be credited the average amount of hours in the detail system at the time of their return. 
Short Notice Details: Details known less than four (4) hours in advance shall be filled according to the "pick list" generated by Telestaff. Officers who accept the detail shall be credited for the hours worked, officers who reject the detail shall not be credited for the hours. 
ARTICLE VI VACATION 
1. Accrued Vacation -Vacation shall be accrued at the following rate: 
After 6 months of service  5 working days  
After 1 year of service  10 working days  
After 5 years of service  15 working days  
After 10 years of service  20 working days  
After 15 years of service  25 working days  
After 16 years of service  26 working days  
After 17 years of service  27 working days  
After 18 years of service  28 working days  
After 19 years of service  29 working days  
After 20 years of service  30 working days  
2.  Annual Vacation Schedule ­ 

(A) 
Vacation requests may be submitted by seniority in the following manner: 

Officers with 30 days submit request 1st week of vacation bid Officers with 25 days submit request 1st week of vacation bid Officers with 20 days submit request 2nd week of vacation bid Officers with 15 days submit request 2nd week of vacation bid Officers with 10 days submit request 2nd week of vacation bid 

(B) 
Vacation requests shall be granted on a seniority basis. Vacation requests submitted after vacation bid dates shall be granted provided however, that any such date requested is not at maximum quota. 


{DocNo=00457489. l } 
3. Block Week Vacation Scheduling-Each officer may be required to schedule his vacation in certain block weeks during the first two full weeks of February. Block weeks are defined as five (5) consecutive scheduled work days per week, provided however, individual vacation days may be taken as follows: 
Officers with 30 days 3 block weeks and 15 individual days 
Officers with 25 days 2 block weeks and 15 individual days 
Officers with 20 days 2 block weeks and 10 individual days 
Officers with 15 days 1 block week and 10 individual days 
Officers with 10 days 1 block week and 5 individual days 
Officers with 5 days 1 block week or 5 individual days 
4. Vacation Quotas ­
A. A maximum of two (2) patrol officers and one (1) patrol supervisor officer shall be permitted on vacation during each shift. 
B. A maximum oftwo (2) detectives and one (1) supervising detective shall be permitted on vacation during each shift. 
C. Supervisors may authorize a day's vacation to any officer on short notice even though it may exceed the maximum permissible number ofofficers on vacation, provided however, by doing so there is no overtime involved or the shift does not go below shift minimum. The determination ofwhat constitutes a shift minimum is a management right encompassed by 15.4.2.1.D. 
5. Vacation Request on a Holiday-Any officer requesting vacation on a holiday shall be required to take five (5) or more vacation days with the requested holiday as one ofthe vacation days. Eight (8) hours straight time shall be paid for the holiday in addition to vacation pay. 
ARTICLE VII HOLIDAYS AND PERSONAL DAYS 
1. Holidays -The following holidays shall be considered as official paid holidays for purpose of implementing the terms of this contract. 
1. 
New Years Day 6. Thanksgiving 

2. 
Easter 7. Christmas Day 

3. 
Memorial Day 8. Employees Wedding Anniversary or 

4. 
July 4th Hire Anniversary Date (ifsingle) 

5. 
Labor Day 9. Employees Birthday 


2. Personal Holidays -Each officer shall receive six (6) additional paid holidays of the officer's own choice each calendar year. Notification of intent to utilize a personal holiday shall be given one (1) week in advance. The Municipality will make every effort to provide the personal holiday when requested and requests may be made later than one week minimum; however, the Municipality reserves the right to maintain minimum standards of police protection 
I DocNo"004S7489 I } 
and establish priorities for time off which could result in alternate days off for the personal holiday but in all cases with the agreement of the individual officer. Personal holidays are not to be construed as vacation leave. 
Personal Holidays for newly hired Police Officers shall be pro-rated in the following manner. Officers being hired between January 1st and June 30th shall receive six (6) personal holidays. Officers being hired between July 1st and December 31 st shall receive three (3) personal Holidays. 
3. Anniversary Date and Birthday -Each police officer may move his/her anniversary date and birthday within seven (7) workdays of their official dates. Notification of intent shall be given one (1) week or less in advance and subject to the following exceptions: 
1. 
To any other official paid holiday, Christmas Eve and/or New Year's Eve. 

2. 
To Officer's Pass Day for purpose of overtime. 


4. 
Holiday Pay -Each police officer scheduled to work on an official holiday is entitled to paid holiday compensation which shall be at double time and one half (2 1/2) times the officers regular base hourly wage for all hours worked. Each police officer scheduled to work on an official holiday on his regular scheduled day off is entitled to paid holiday compensation which shall be at double time and one half (2-1/2) times his regular base hourly wage for all hours worked. Each police officer scheduled to be off on an official holiday is entitled to his regular base hourly wage for a normal workday. Each police officer whose regular scheduled day off falls on an official holiday is entitled to an additional eight (8) hours pay at this regular base hourly wage. 

5. 
Special Detail on Official Holiday -Each police officer scheduled to work or called out to work a special detail on an official paid holiday as defined in this article shall be paid at the holiday rate of double time and one half (2-1/2) times the officers regular base hourly wage for a minimum of four ( 4) hours. 


ARTICLE VIII SICK/INJURY LEAVE 
1. Sick Leave -Each sworn police officer will receive at the beginning of each calendar year, an allocation of ten (10) petty sick leave days which are to be used for absence due to illness or injury of a non-occupational nature and for which worker's compensation is not paid. Police Officers shall be entitled to their full wages and benefits as provided for in this agreement for each of the days they may be absent on sick leave with a bonafide illness or injury. At the option of the employee at the end ofeach calendar year, the Municipality will buy back each unused sick day at $100 per day, not to exceed a total of$1,000.00 or the employee may accrue up to 30 sick days for emergency purposes. The Municipality will provide an initial 20 banked days. In the case of retirement, all unused days will be paid at a rate of$100.00 each and payment will be made in the first pay in February. For police officers hired on or after April 6, 2016, there shall be no buy-back of unused sick days upon retirement. 
(DocNo=00457489. I J 
Sick time for newly hired Police Officers shall be pro-rated in the following manner: Officers being hired between January Ist and June 30th shall receive ten (10) petty sick days and officer hired between July 1st and December 31 st shall receive five (5) petty sick days. Newly hired officers shall also receive twenty (20) sick days in the bank upon appointment to the department. 
2. Short Term Disability-Employees shall additionally be entitled to short term disability, for illnesses of a nonoccupational nature and for which worker's compensation is not paid, as provided below: 
A. A short-term disability is defined as a period of disability which may be anticipated to last ten (10) or more calendar days. 
B. The employers shall, within each calendar year provide up to a maximum of twenty-six (26) weeks of short-term disability pay at 78% of regular base earnings, for each occurrence of short-term disability or recurrence of previously compensated short-term disability. 
C. In order to receive short-term disability benefits, the employee must present to the Municipal Manager, for his approval appropriate medical documentation that the iJlness may be anticipated to last ten (10) or more calendar days. 
D. There shall be a ten (10) calendar day waiting period for each occurrence (as distinguished from reoccurrence) of disability. During the waiting period, an employee shall first use petty sick leave, if such leave is available. When petty sick leave is not available, and the employee does not elect to use other earned leave, the employee shall be placed in approved leave without pay status during which the employee shall retain all benefits provided under this Agreement, and shall continue to earn municipal and bargaining unit seniority. If an employee suffers a reoccurrence of an earlier compensated disability; there shall be no second or subsequent waiting period. In the event that an employee becomes disabled more than once in a calendar year, and the second disability is not a reoccurrence of the first, the Municipality may, upon a case by case basis and at the sole discretion of the Municipal Manager, assume the cost of the second or subsequent waiting period. 
E. The Municipality shall provide a self-insured short-term disability policy at a fixed cost of $10 per month for all members. The entire cost of the policy shall be paid by the employee and payments shall be deducted from each employee's pay on an after-tax basis. No income taxes shall be deducted from any short-term disability payments. 
3. This short-term disability period shall be fixed per incident at twenty-six (26) weeks, however in the event that the illness remains for any length of time beyond the twenty-six 
(26) weeks as documented by appropriate professional medical opinion, the Municipality shall self-insure this additional period oftime pending outcome or disability claim application. 
{DocNo=00457489. l } 
4. Related to the short-term disability leave, it is agreed the periodic medical examinations may be required by the Municipal Manager and, if so required, will be at the Municipality's expense. 
ARTICLE IX BEREAVEMENT LEA VE 
1. 
Immediate Family-Each police officer shall be entitled to his/her next five (5) scheduled working days off with pay in the event of a death in the employees' immediate family. If the death occurs while the police officer is on vacation, the employee shall be entitled to bereavement leave in the same manner, and shall not be charged with vacation leave. For the purpose ofthis section, the immediate family is defined as spouse, child, stepchild, parent, and parent of spouse, grandchild, sister, brother, and grandparent ofemployee. 

2. 
Near Family -Each police officer shall be entitled to his/her next three (3) scheduled working days off with pay in the event of a death in the employees near family. Ifthe death occurs while the police officer is on vacation, the employee shall be entitled to bereavement leave in the same manner, and sha11 not be charged with vacation leave. For the purpose ofthis section the near family is defined as grandparent ofspouse, sister-in-law, brother­in-law, and foster child. 

3. 
Other Family Members-Each police officer shall be entitled to one (L) day off with pay in the event of a death in the employees other family. No payment will be made if the funeral falls on a day when the employee is not scheduled to work, or if travel to the funeral is not feasible. For the purpose ofthis section, the other family members are defined as aunts, uncles, nephew, niece, and first cousins. 


ARTICLEX ADDITIONAL LEAVE 
1. 
Additional Leave -The Municipality may grant an additional leave to each police officer in emergencies for a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive days, either with or without pay, under such circumstances as it deems appropriate as determined by the Municipal Manager. Examples of additional leave may include but are not limited to grievous injury or illness requiring emergency attention for the spouse, children, or other dependents ofan officer; crisis requiring extreme emotional adjustment where the mental stability of the officer and his ability to perform his duties may be in question; and other instances where in the judgment ofthe Municipality the best interest of the police service ofthe Municipality and the individual police officer are served by the granting of additional leave. 

2. 
Family/Medical Leave Act-Family/Medical Leave shall be granted in accordance with Section 3.15 of the Employee Handbook. 


lD0eN0•OO4S74S9.1 J 
ARTICLE XI MODIFIED DUTY WORK ASSIGNMENT 
1. A modified duty work assignment program shall be instituted to require employees to perfonn duties other than normal duties, which suit their physical condition. No employee shall perform modified duty work assignments for more than six ( 6) months without approval of the administration. The types of modified duty assignments are as follows: reception desk work, report writing, records maintenance, vehicle shuttling, etc. All modified duty assignments shall be performed in civilian clothes, on the shift and at the time determined by the Municipal Manager provided that nothing contained herein shall abridge the rights of an employee under the provisions ofthe Pennsylvania Workers Compensation Act, disability or pension system. 
ARTICLE XII INSURANCE 
Health care benefits shall be provided to all full-time sworn police officers and their immediate family and qualified dependents, and shall be fully paid by the municipality except that: between January 1, 2019 and December 31, 2019 all participating sworn police officers shall contribute 8% of total cost of healthcare premium deducted on a pre-tax basis; and, effective January 1, 2020 and thereafter, all participating sworn police officers shall contribute 9% of total cost ofhealthcare premium deducted on a pre-tax basis; and, effective January 1, 2021 and thereafter, all participating sworn police officers shall contribute 10% oftotal cost of healthcare premium deducted on a pre-tax basis; and, effective January 1, 2022 and thereafter, all participating sworn police officers shall contribute 10% oftotal cost ofhealthcare premium deducted on a pre-tax basis. 
1. Health Care -It is the intent of the employer to provide Healthcare coverage and other health related coverage to the employee. Said coverage is as follows: 
a.  Hospitalization ­The Municipality shall provide active officers with health  
insurance coverage through the existing MBS PPO 1500 Q  
b.  Basic Eye Care Vision benefits ofAmerica Plan C  
c,  High Option Dental  
d.  Basic Prescription Drug ­MBS PPO 1500 Q  

Further, it is the intent of the Employer and the Union to work together to control increased costs of Healthcare benefits. The employer shall have the right to seek out other alternate health insurance plans including via other providers. The alternate plan selected by the Municipality must be comparable to the current health insurance plan (to include vision, dental and prescription benefits) enjoyed by the bargaining unit. Once the Municipality has selected an alternate plan, it must notify the Police Wage/Policy Committee (WPC) and provide a comprehensive summary of all plan benefits to the WPC for analysis and consideration. 
If the WPC disagrees that the suggested alternate plan is comparable it shall notify the Municipality in writing within fifteen (15) calendar days ofreceiving the presentation. The 
(DocNo=00457489.I I 
parties shall then submit the dispute as to comparability to expedited arbitration. The arbitrator if not agreed upon by the parties shall be selected from a list of three arbitrators provided by the AAA. 
The hearing shall be held within 45 calendar days ofthe WPC's notification that the alternate plan has been rejected. The arbitrator shall thereafter issue his/her award within 15 calendar days of the close of the hearing. The award shall either grant the alternate plan or mandate that coverage remain pursuant to the existing plan. The Municipality shall only be permitted to arbitrate a plan once per calendar year. 
If the Municipality receives notice or information indicating that its healthcare plan costs will be subject to the Affordable Care Act's "Cadillac Tax" excise tax, the Municipality will give the Union written notice of that fact and the parties will immediately negotiate changes in the plan design, plan and/or plan carrier in order to avoid the imposition of the tax. If no agreement is reached within fifteen (15) calendar days of the Municipality's written notice to the Union regarding the issue, then the parties will proceed to an expedited interest arbitration proceeding in accordance with Act 111. The sole purpose for that expedited arbitration proceeding will be for the arbitration panel to modify the plan, p]an design and/or plan carrier in order to reduce the cost of coverage and eliminate the exposure to the Cadil1ac Tax. The decision ofthe arbitration panel on this issue shall be issued within forty-five (45) calendar days of the appointment of the neutra] arbitrator. 
2. Health Care Rebate Program -For Police Officers hired prior to April 6, 2106, the Municipality shall offer a cash rebate program for non-participation in the Municipality's group health care plan. The cash rebate shall be forty-five percent (45%) ofthe monthly premiums paid by the Municipality and shall be paid on a monthly basis. Employees shall have the right to cancel the agreement at any time. 
For Police Officers hired on or after April 6, 2016, the Municipality shall offer a cash rebate program for non-participation in the Municipality's group health care plan. The cash rebate shall be $3,000 annually for a family, husband and wife, and parent with children~ and $1,500 annually for single. Payments shall be made on a monthly basis and, in order to qualify, the employee must notify the Municipality in advance and affirm in writing that they have health insurance through another employer-provided group health care plan. 
3. 
Life Insurance -Life Insurance shall be provided to all full-time sworn police officers in the amount of $85,000.00 with $170,000.00 accidental death double indemnity and shall be fully paid by the Municipality. 

4. 
Non-Work Related Long Term Disability Insurance: The Municipality shall provide a long term disability (LTD) benefit through an LTD insurance carrier selected at the discretion of the Municipality for police officers who suffer a non-service related injury or illness. The LTD benefit shall be in the amount ofsixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 2/3%) of a police officer's base salary, which may be subject to offsets and deductions per the terms ofthe 


{DocNo~00457489. l } 
insurance policy. The Municipality shall not be obligated to provide any LTD benefit beyond that which is provided by the LTD policy. 
5. 
Police Professional Liability Insurance -Each full-time sworn police officer shall be insured against liability claims that may arise out of the performance of his duties. The insurance shall be fully paid by the Municipality and shall have the following coverage: Two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per individual, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per claim and a one million-dollar ($1,000,000.00) aggregate. 

6. 
Reimbursement of Legal Defense Costs -The Municipality shall reimburse legal defense costs incurred by an officer who is charged with the commission of a crime arising out of the performance of his duties where the charges are dropped or he is not found guilty after trial. 



ARTICLE XIII PENSION RETIREMENT 
1. Pension Eligibility -Each full-time sworn police officer may retire at age fifty-five (55) with twenty-five (25) years of service. An early retirement option shall be available to all full-time police officers with the following provisions: Early retirement after twenty-five (25) years of service and attainment of age fifty (50). Any full-time police officer may exercise this option at a time designated by the Municipality, known as the 1'open window". This "Window" will be open annually upon the completion of an actuarial study regarding this benefit. 
Early Retirement Benefit -The early retirement benefit shall be provided to a member of the police force with twenty or more years of service who terminates employment prior to the completion of superannuation retirement age and service requirements and who files a written application for any early retirement benefit with the governing body of the Municipality. The early retirement benefit shall become effective as of the date the application is filed with the governing body or the date designated on the application whichever is later, and shall be actuarial equivalent of a partial superannuation retirement benefit calculated by using the last actuarial valuation report filed by the Public Employee Retirement Commission under the Act of December 18, 1984 (P.L. 1005, No. 205), the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act. 
2. Pension Contributions -Each member shall contribute five (5%) percent of gross earnings to the pension fund plan. In the event any member separates from Municipal service, he shall receive the dollar amount of contributions made plus interest earnings of five and one-half (5-1/2% percent) compounded quarterly. If the unfunded liability of the pension fund is reduced or paid off, the employee contributions may be reduced at an equal percentage rate. 
3. Calculation of Pension Benefits ­
{DocNo~00457489, I ) 
A. The monthly pension benefit shall be calculated at 50% of the participant's monthly average salary. 
B. For police officers hired prior to January 24, 2001, normal retirement benefits shall be the average of the highest 36 months during the last 60 months of the participant's employment, and service-related disability pensions shall be based on the average of the participant's highest 36 months. Lump sum payments will be included in the calculation of monthly pension benefits, including service related disability pensions, consistent with past practice. 
C. For police officers hired after January 24, 2001, the monthly average salary shall be the average of the last 36 months of employment, for normal retirement benefits and service-related disability pensions. Lump sum payments received upon retirement shall not be included in the calculation of monthly pension benefits, including service related disability pensions, except to the extent that said payments are for benefits which were earned during the calculation period, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Auditor General Bulletin No. 2001-01, as amended. 
4. 
Service Increments -Each member shall be eligible for a fifty ($50.00) dollar per month increase upon retirement for each year past twenty-five (25) years he remains as a full­time police officer in the Municipality of Monroeville. The Maximum shall be one hundred ($100.00) dollars per month for twenty-seven (27) years or more of service. 

5. 
Social Security Offset -The Municipality shall modify the Police Pension Trust Agreement to provide for a zero (0%) percent offset of social security, except for a disability pension. 


6. Survivor Benefits ­
Definitions-Attending College -For an eligible child sha11 mean the child is registered at an accredited institution of higher learning and is carrying a minimum course load of 7 credit hours per semester. 
A. Death of participant after beginning to receive benefits under this plan or if eligible to retire and dies before retirement benefits commence. -A survivor benefit shall be paid in an amount equal to 50% ofthe participant's monthly accrued benefit as of the date of death. The survivor benefit shall be paid monthly to the surviving spouse of the participant, if any, until the date of death of the surviving spouse. Upon the death of the surviving spouse, or ifthere is no surviving spouse, the survivor benefit shall be paid monthly in equal shares to the surviving dependent children of the deceased participant until the attainment of age 18, or if any dependent children are attending college, for the child until they obtain age 
23. The shares payable to the surviving dependent children shall be adjusted as each child ceases to be eligible to receive a share of the benefits hereunder. 
B. Return of Contributions -If a Participant shall die before payment of a benefit has commenced and without eligibility for payment of a Survivor Benefit under Article 
(DocNo~00457489. l J 
VI, Section 6.02 of the Police Pension Plan, the Beneficiary shall be eligible to receive a distribution in an amount equal to the Accumulated Contributions ofthe Participant as of the date of death ofthe Participant. If the Participant has received Disability Benefits, the amount of the distribution ofthe Accumulated Contributions shall be reduced by the amount of Disability Retirement Benefits which have been paid. 
7. Pension Vesting-An officer completing a minimum of twelve (12) years service with the department shall be entitled to vest his pension account in the event he is voluntarily or involuntarily separated from Municipal Service. This allows a member to leave Municipal Service without withdrawing his pension contributions and to receive a monthly pension benefit at such time as he attains fifty (55) years of age and his account has remained on record for the required twenty-five (25) year period. Vested police officer shall be entitled to receive a monthly retirement benefit payable on the officer's normal retirement date equal to fifty (50%) percent of average monthly earnings times the ratio of completed years of service to complete years from date of hire to normal retirement date. 
8. Use of Military Service Time ­
A. Each police officer shall be entitled to use up to twenty-four (24) months of non-intervening military service in the Armed Forces of the United States toward retirement, except for service increments, provided, however, such participating employee makes an additional contribution to the pension fund in order to compensate the fund for the crediting of such service. Said additional contributions shall be calculated by the Municipal Actuary in accordance with State Law. The participating employee at the time of selecting to purchase the non-intervening military service time shall have the option of utilizing the previous twenty-four 
(24) 
months for benefit calculation or of using an estimate ofthe prospective twenty-four (24) months utilizing established contractual obligations. A DD214 with honorable discharge must be presented to the Police Pension Trust Committee for validation and qualification. 

B. 
Each police officer shall be entitled to purchase intervening military service in accordance with Act 600, 53 P.S. 770(a). 


9. Work Related Disability Pension: 
SECTION 1: Calculation of Benefits -The amount ofmonthly benefit payable to a Plan participant who is 11totally and permanently disabled" as a result of a service related injury shall be equal to the following: 
a. Work Related Disability from Day One on the Job -50 percent ofthe participant's monthly average salary, as set forth in Article XIII Section 3. However, pursuant to Act 30 of 2002, disability pension benefits will be offset or reduced by the amount of social security disability benefits received for the same injuries. 
SECTION 2: It is the intention ofthe Municipality to exclude consideration of short­term disability payments, workmen's compensation payments and the like when calculating a participant's monthly average salary for disability pension benefit purposes. Therefore, for 
{DocNo=00457489. I } 
purposes of the Plan, "monthly average salary" shall take into account only wages paid to the 
participant while he was an active employee. Time spent on Heart and Lung Act leave shall be 
deemed active service. 
SECTION 3: Definition of "Total and Permanent Disability1' and "Wages" -"Total and Permanent Disability11 shall mean a condition of physical and mental impairment due to which a Plan participant is unable to perform the usual and customary duties of a Monroeville Police officer, which condition is reasonably expected to continue to be permanent for the remainder of the Participant's lifetime. 
Whether a plan participant is "totally and permanently disabled" for Plan purposes shall be determined by a medical examiner appointed by or acceptable to the Municipality. 
"Wages" are total compensation, including but not limited to, overtime, longevity, shift differential, and premium pay. Wages shall be based upon an individual's W-2 form for a calendar year, except as set forth in Article XIII Section 3. C. 
SECTION 4: Payment of Disability Benefits -Disability payments from the Plan shall be made monthly as of the first day of each month commencing as of the first day of the month immediately fol1owing or coincident with the participant's disability date. 
SECTION 5: The disability pension benefit provided by the Plan shall also include the Widow's Benefit established by Monroeville Ordinance No. 892. 
10. Health Care Benefits for Retirees and Spouse ­
A. For all officers hired prior to 7 /21/05, a]] hea1th care benefits as provided to all police officers covered by this contract shall be provided to all police officers who retire, and to the spouse of retired police officer, and shall be fully paid by the Municipality until such time as they respectively obtain the age of Medicare eligibility. 
A Freedom Blue Supplement plan equal to the currently available plan shall be provided to each retired police officer and spouse beginning at Medicare eligibility. 
B. For all officers hired after 7/21/05, the Municipality shall create and provide for Officers to exercise two options. The first is a tax-exempt Retirement Health Savings Account (RHS) in order to provide an array of approved benefits to its member Officers. The second is a tax deferred 457 Retirement Plan to provide supplemental retirement funds to member Officers. In either case, the Municipality shall contribute $1,175 per year on behalf of the Officer to his/her chosen plan. Annual contributions shall be made by the Municipality no later than the Officer's anniversary date of hire. The choice exercised by the Officer shall be irrevocable unless Internal Revenue Code Provisions allows the Officer to transfer funds from one plan to the other without penalty to the Municipality. In the case of the RHS Plan, the Municipality shall take whatever steps are necessary to establish the trust, to appoint a trustee and to obtain IRC approval. In the 
{ DocNo~00457489. l } 
case of the 457 Retirement Plan, the Municipality shall take whatever steps are necessary to establish it. 
Additionally, for Officers hired after 7/21/05, said Officers, their immediate families and qualified dependents (i.e. individual, husband and wife, parent with children, and family coverage) shall, upon retirement of the Officer, be permitted to remain in the Hospitalization Group Plan in effect for the full-time active members of the Police Department so long as the retiring Officer reimburses the Municipality for the cost of said coverage. This shall apply to dental and vision benefits under the same circumstances. 
11. Life Insurance for Retirees -The Municipality shall provide each police officer who retires $15,000.00 in life insurance payable to retirees' beneficiary upon death of retiree. 
ARTICLE XIV CLOTHING, UNIFORM, EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE ALLOWANCE 
1. 
Clothing, Uniform, Equipment and Maintenance Allowance -The Municipality agrees to pay annually to each officer a uniform allowance of nine hundred ($900.00) dollars and accumulative for two (2) years. Uniform allowance shall include all leather goods. Clothing, Uniform, Equipment and Maintenance Allowance shall include all items used or worn in the performance of an officer's duty including secondary or "back-up" weapons. 

2. 
New Hires -New police officers hired by the Municipality shall receive a complete outfitting of uniforms at the Municipality's expense, which initial outfitting shall be in lieu of the unifo1m allowance for the year of hire, and shall be paid at fifty (50%) percent) for the following year. 

3. 
Extra-Ordinary Uniform Cost -All extra ordinary uniforms costs, i.e., specified department cleaning process, additions to or redesign of uniforms, etc. will be borne by the Municipality of Monroeville. 

4. 
Article Damage -In the event that a Police Officer damages his clothing or equipment (to include but not limited to, wrist watch, eyeglasses) in the course of the performance of his assigned duties, reimbursement for such damaged article or articles shall be provided by the Municipality upon presentation of the damaged article and providing the damage was not the direct result of neglect or negligence on the part of the officer. (Watches-$200­maximum and Sun Glasses-$150 maximum) 

5. 
Safety Equipment -The Municipality shall provide Police Officers assigned to the Traffic Division with the necessary safety equipment needed for the performance of their assigned duties. Such equipment shall consist of motorcycle helmets, riding boot, gloves, safety glasses and waterproof clothing: 

6. 
Soft Body Armor -Effective as of April 6, 2016, the Municipality shall pay one hundred percent ( 100%) of the cost of soft body armor for Police Officers. These vests will be replaced in accordance with the manufacturer's established useful life. It shall be the 


[DocNo=004S7489.I } 
responsibility of the Police Officer to notify the Administration at least six (6) months prior to the expiration date for his soft body armor. The Municipality may require Police Officers to wear the body armor while on duty. 
7. Prescription Eyeglass Inserts -The Municipality shall (at no cost to the employee) provide each employee who wears prescription eyewear with a prescription lens insert designed for the use in the employee's Department issued protective mask. This shall apply only to the initial issue of the prescription lens insert. Once the Municipality has paid for the initial insert, any changes in prescription requiring a new insert shall be a cost assigned to the employee alone. 
ARTICLE XV COURT APPEARANCE 
1. Court Appearance -Each officer shall be permitted to appear at all his own scheduled court cases. Court cases are defined as follows: 
1. 
Arraignments 5. Juvenile Court and Intake Hearings 

2. 
Hearings (criminal and traffic) 6. 302 Commitment Hearings 

3. 
Pre-Trial 7. Civil Court 

4. 
Court (criminal and traffic) 8. LCB Hearings 9. Act 3 3 Hearings 


2. Off Duty Court Appearance Compensation -Each officer when appearing at any scheduled court case on his regular scheduled off duty time shall be compensated at the following rate: 
1. 
Hearings -2 hours minimum at a time and one-half pay rate 

2. 
Pre-Trial -4 hours 

3. 
Court ( criminal and traffic) -12 hours 

4. 
Juvenile Court -12 hours 

5. 
Intake Hearings -12 hours 6. 302 Commitment -4 hours 


7. LCB Hearings -2 hours 
3. Court Appearance -Each officer shall receive the day off without loss ofpay to appear at the following court cases: 
1. 
Court ( criminal, traffic, or civil) 

2. 
Juvenile Court 

3. 
Intake Hearings 

4. 
Act 33 Hearings 


ARTICLE XVI GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE AND ARBITRATION 
1. In the event ofany controversy concerning the meaning or application ofany provision ofthis contract and/or po1icy or procedures set forth by the administration, and all matters of discipline, there shall be no suspension of work, but such controversy shall be treated 
(DocNo~57489.I J 
as a grievance and shall be settled, if possible, in the simplest and most direct manner, by the Wage Policy Committee and the Municipality in the following manner: 
STEP ONE: Any grievance submitted by a member of the Police Department must be presented to the Wage Policy Committee in writing and must be filed no later than fifteen 
(15) working days following the date the cause of the grievance occurs or knowledge of its occurrence. The Wage Policy committee shall then present the grievance to the Chief of Police or his designee. 
STEP TWO: The Chief of Police or his designee shall answer the grievance in writing within seven (7) working days from the date of its submission to him. 
STEP THREE: Ifthe grievance is not settled satisfactorily to all parties the matter shall 
be presented to the Municipal Manager or his designee for resolution. The Manager or 
his designee shall meet with the Wage Policy Committee no later than seven (7) working 
days from the date of its submission to him. The Manager or his designee shall then 
report his findings to the Wage Policy Committee in writing within seven (7) days of said 
meeting. 
STEP FOUR: A. Ifthe dispute or grievance is not settled in the third step, the matter 
shall be submitted to binding arbitration. The Wage Policy Committee shall as soon as 
possible, but within twenty (20) working days after the reply was given in the third step, 
present in writing to the Municipal Manager the name of its arbitrator. The Manager 
shall within seven (7) days following receipt of said appointment submit in writing the 
name of its arbitrator to the Wage Policy Committee. The parties will present a joint 
statement in writing as to the matter to be submitted to arbitration. The two (2) 
arbitrators so selected shall meet as soon as possible and endeavor to agree on a 
settlement of the matter in dispute. If settlement by the two (2) arbitrators is not agreed to 
within five (5) working days they shall endeavor to select a third arbitrator within the next 
five (5) working days. Should the two (2) arbitrators be unable to agree on a third 
arbitrator within the time limit specified, then the parties shaU jointly request the 
American Arbitration Association to furnish a list of three (3) arbitrators from among 
whom the third arbitrator shaU be selected. It sha11 be the responsibi]ity of the 
Municipality to make the first "strike" when selecting the third arbitrator. 
B. The three (3) arbitrators so selected shall constitute the Board of Arbitration, shall meet at the ear]iest possib]e date, shall review the matter in dispute, and shall make their findings and reach their conclusions as expeditiously as possible. The Board of Arbitration in making findings and reaching conclusions shall confine such findings and conclusions to the matter, which was submitted to the Board in writing. The arbitrator shall have no power to add to or subtract from, or modify any terms ofthis agreement. The findings made or conclusions reached by a majority of the arbitrators sha11 be submitted to the parties in writing and shalJ be final and binding upon the parties and the aggrieved. 
{DocNo=00457489 1 ) 
C. The Wage Policy Committee and the aggrieved party shall be allowed the necessary time off, without loss ofscheduled pay to attend grievance meetings. The expense ofany salary incident to the services ofthe third arbitrator and all general expenses ofthe board shall be as provided in Act 111 ofJune 24, 1968. 
2. 
The Wage Policy Committee and members ofthe Police Department covered by this Agreement agree that as long as this agreement is in effect there shall be no strikes, sit­downs, concerted slowdowns, stoppages of work, boycotts or any unlawful acts that interfere with the Municipality's operations and with the public safety ofthe citizens ofthe Municipality. Any violation ofthe foregoing may be the subject of disciplinary action, including discharge, subject to all existing laws. 

3. 
Any grievance not acted upon within the time limits prescribed under this Article shall be deemed to be conceded by the party failing to act within said time limits, unless such time limit has been extended by mutual agreement in writing. Under no circumstances will the failure to meet the prescribed time limits be construed by either party as having established a precedent. 

4. 
The Municipality and Wage Policy Committee shall split grievance costs 50/50. 

5. 
The grievance procedure is limited to active employees only. 




6. All claims or disputes relating to a Police Officer's entit1ement to benefits under the Heart and Lung Act, 53 P.S. §637 et seq., may be pursued in the contractual grievance arbitration process or through a Local Agency hearing, but not both. In the event a police officer elects to process a claim or dispute relating to a Police Officer's entitlement to benefits under the Heart and Lung Act through the grievance process set forth herein, he/she shall be foreclosed from pursing same through a Local Agency hearing and vice versa. 
ARTICLE XVII SAFETY AND HEALTH 
1. 
The Wage Policy Committee agrees to the Municipality ofMonroeville's Safety Manual Ordinance # 1934 as amended. 

2. 
All employees shall be subject to drug/alcohol random testing. Such testing shall be in accordance with guidelines as established in the Drug and Alcohol Testing Ordinance. 


ARTICLE XVIII PAST PRACTICE 
1. All existing working conditions, understandings, existing benefits, and past practices previously enjoyed by members ofthe Bargaining Unit not modified by this agreement, shall remain "AS IS". 
(DocNo=004S7489. I I 
ARTICLE XIX DURATION AND TERMINATION 
1. This Agreement shall become effective as ofJanuary 1, 2019 and shall remain in effect up to and including midnight, December 31, 2022. 
(DocNo~004S7489.1 J 
APPENDIX A 
WAGES 
Effective January 1, 2019, the base annual wage includes a 3% wage increase from 2018 based on the top patrolman rate. 
2019  Hourly  Yearly  
Lieutenant  $55.89  $116,251.20  
Sergeant  $54.89  $114,171.20  
Corporal  $53.89  $112,091.20  
Top Patrolman  $51.89  $ I 07 ,931.20  
Step E  $46.70  $97,136.00  
Step Dl  $44.11  $91,748.80  
Step D  $41.51  $86,340.80  
Step Cl  $38.92  $80,953.60  
StepC  $36.32  $75,545.60  
Step B  $3 l.l3  $64,750.4  
Step A  $25.00  $52,000  

Effective January 1, 2020, the base annual wage includes a 2.75% wage increase from 2019 based on the top patro1man rate. 
2020  Hourlv  Yearlv  
Lieutenant  $57.32  $119,225.60  
Sergeant  $56.32  $117,145.60  
Corporal  $55.32  $115,065.60  
Top Patrolman  $53.32  $110,905.60  
Step E  $47.99  $99,819.20  
Step DI  $45.32  $94,265.60  
Step D  $42.66  $88,723.80  
Step Cl  $39.99  $83,179.20  
StepC  $37.32  $77,625.60  
StepB  $31.99  $66,539.20  
Step A  $25.00  $52,000  

(DoeNo~00457489.I l 
Effective January I, 2021, the base annual wage includes a 3% wage increase from 2020 based on the top patrolman rate. 
2021  Hourlv  Yearly  
Lieutenant  $58.92  $122,553.60  
Sergeant  $57.92  $120,473.60  
Corporal  $56.92  $118,393.60  
Top Patrolman  $54.92  $114,233.60  
Step E  $49.43  $102,814.40  
Step DI  $46.68  $97,094.40  
Step D  $43.94  $91,395.20  
Step Cl  $4l.19  $85,675.20  
Step C  $38.44  $79,955.20  
Step B  $32.95  $68,536.00  
Step A  $25.00  $52,000.00  

Effective January I, 2022, the base annual wage includes a 3% wage increase from 2021 based on the top patrolman rate. 
2022  Hourly  Yearly  
Lieutenant  $60.57  $125,985.60  
Sergeant  $59.57  $123,905.60  
Corporal  $58.57  $121,825.60  
Top Patrolman  $56.57  $117,665.60  
Step E  $50.91  $105,892.80  
Step DI  $48.08  $100,006.40  
Step D  $45.26  $94,140.80  
Step Cl  $42.43  $88,254.40  
Step C  $39.60  $82,368.00  
Step B  $33.94  $70,595.20  
Step A  $25.00  $52,000.00  

(DocNo~00-157489.1 } 
ATTEST: MUNICIPALITY OF MONROEVILLE 
~d·~
TimothyiLfui Municipal Manager Mayor 

WAGE POLICY COMMITTEE: 
· anWhalen 
:jirA4 

Sk~ggs , 
(DocNo=004~7489 I J 






