AGREEMENT BETWEEN  Teamsters Local Union No. 25 Representing  Clairton Police Department Employees AND  THE CITY OF CLAIRTON JANUARY 1 219 TO DECEMBER 31 222  Table of Contents ARTICLE NO. 1 -RECOGN1TION . 1 ARTICLE NO. 2 - NON-DISCRIMINATION .l ARTICLE NO. 3 -DUES CHECK-OFF . 1 ARTICLE NO. 4 -M.ANAGERIAL RIGHTS.2 ARTICLE NO. 5 - SENIORITY.2 ARTICLE NO. 6 - COt-1PENSATION .4 ARTICLE NO. 7 -HOURS OF WORK AND WORK SCHEDULES .6 ARTICLE NO. 8 -SICK LEAVE. I  ARTICLE NO. 9 - VACATION . 11 ARTICLE NO. 1 - HOLIDAYS . 13 ARTICLENO. ll -PERS ONALDAY . 14 ARTICLE NO. 12 - BEREAVEMENT LEAVE . 14 ARTICLE NO. 13 -MILITARY SERVICE . 15 ARTICLE NO. 14 -PENSION  RETlR.EMENT BENEFITS . 15 ARTICLE NO. 15 - JOB STEWARDS . 15 ARTICLE NO. 16- GRIEVANCE PR OCEDURE . 16 ARTICLE NO. 17 - SUSPENSION ANDOR DISCHARGE . 17 ARTICLE NO. 18 - HEALTH AND WELFARE PROGRAM . 18 ARTICLE NO. 19 - FALSE ARREST INSURANCE .2 ARTICLE NO. 2 - POLICE OFFICERS BILL OF RIGHTS .2 ARTICLE NO. 21 - MISCELLANEOUS .21 ARTICLE NO. 22 -DRUG AND ALCOHOL USE IN THE WORKPLACE .23 ARTICLE NO. 23 - LEGALITY .23 ARTICLE NO. 24 - SEP ARABILITY .23 ARTICLE NO. 25 - NO WANER OF DEFAULT.23 ARTICLE NO. 26 - MODIFICATION.23 ARTICLE NO. 27 - EFFECTIVE DATES .24 Exhibit A .25 Exhibit B . .31 Exhibit C .33 Exhibit D .43  i  AGREEMENT Made and entered into this 1st day of January 219 by and between the City of Clairton hereinafter referred to as the City or the Employer and Service Personnel and Employees of the Dairy Industry Teamsters Local Union No. 25 affiliated with the International Brotherhood of Teamsters Chauffeurs Warehousemen and Helpers of America hereinafter referred to as the Union.

WITNESSETH  ARTICLE NO. 1 . RECOGNITION Section 1 The City recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive representative for purpose of collective bargaining with respect to wages. hours and other terms and conditions of employment for all Police Department employees described herein.

Section 2 As used in these Agreement provisions the tenn employee or police officer refers to those employees included in the bargaining unit as certified and determined by the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board on June 27 1997 at No. PF-R-97-74-W (PF-R-83-18-W) which are all full time and regular part-time police officers including but not limited to patrolmen and sergeants and excluding the assistant public safety director the public safety director and any other management level employees.

 ARTICLE NO. 2 - NON-DISCRIMINATION Section 1  The parties hereto agree not to discriminate against any employee on the basis of his race religious creed color national origin age pregnancy sex marital status and non-work related handicaps.

Section 2 The Employer agrees not to interfere with the rights ofthe employees to become members of the Union.

Section 3 The use of male pronouns is for convenience only and is to be read as referring both to males and females.

 ARTICLE NO. 3 - DUES CHECK-OFF Section 1 The Employer agrees to deduct monthly Union Dues andor uniform assessments of the Local Union from the first pay of each month of any employee from whom written authorization is received and to send such dues to the Secretary-Treasurer of the Union on or before the end of the month for which deduction is made.

Section 2 The Union agrees to indemnify and save the Employer harmless from any and all claims suits or other forms of liability arising out of deduction of money for all Union dues under this Article.

1  ARTICLE NO. 4  MANAGERIAL RIGHTS Section I  Except as expressly limited by applicable law or provisions of this Agreement the Employer shall have and retain solely and exclusively all managerial responsibilities which shall include but not be limited to the right to determine the policies ofthe Employer to establish amend or modify an overall budget to establish change combine or abolish job classifications or the job content of any classification to reprimand suspend discharge for cause or otherwise relieve employees from duty to hire promote demote lay off and recall employees to work to control and regulate the use of machinery equipment and other property of the Employer to introduce new or improved techniques to determine the number and types of employees required and to direct the work force except as restricted by this Agreement or appropriate state law.

ARTICLE NO. 5 - SENIORITY Section 1 For full-time employees seniority is based entirely upon years of service as a full-time employee.

Section 2 For part-time employees seniority is based entirely upon years of service.

Section 3 An employees seniority shall be broken for any of the following reasons  A. Voluntary termination of employment including retirements. A written resignation is deemed accepted when delivered to the City Manager. However any oral resignation may be successfully withdrawn by the employee making it if he does so in writing and within twenty-four (24) hours form the time the employee makes his oral resignation.

B. Discharge for just cause.

C. When recalled for layoff upon his failure to return to work within a period of one (1) week after the employee has received notification to so return. The employee must be given notice in writing by certified mail return receipt requested. Certified mail notice sent to the employees last known address as maintained in the Employers personnel records and which is returned to the Employer or the Employers representative by the U.S. Postal Service as unclaimed shall be deemed to have been served upon the employee on the last da.te of attanpted service as shown on the mail return by the U.S. Postal Service.

D. Layoff in excess of two (2) years due to lack of work.

E. Immediately upon the issuance of a final determination by a state or federal statutory agency that an employee is pennanently and totally disabled from perfonning the work of a police officer.

 2  Section 4 Absence from work in excess of two (2) years due to a compensable disability incurred during the course of employment with the Employer shall not break continuous service provided such individual is returned to work within thirty (3) days after final payment of statutory compensation for such disability.

Section 5 - Probationary Employees Prior to the start date of any newly hired officer they must complete the firearms qualification for the City of Clairton Police Deparbnent using their own ammunition (City of Clairton approved) and on their own time. All new employees shall be considered probationary employees for a period of twelve (12) months from their most recent date of  hire. If the Chief ofPolice feels it is necessary for proper evaluation a six (6) month extension ofan employees probation shall be served in writing to the employee and the Union. During an employees probationary period he shall have no rights whatsoever under this Agreement except for the right to be paid the probationary wage rate specified in Article No. 6 Section I hereafter. A probationary employee may be summarily suspended andor dismissed during his probation at the sole discretion of the Employer without being subject to the Grievance Procedure defined herein or any other provisions or paragraphs ofthis Agreement. A probationary employee upon completion of this probationary period shall be entitled to seniority credited retroactive to his most recent date of employment.

Section 6 When an employee whose seniority has been broken by any of the above causes is hired again he shall begin as a new employee of the Employer.

Section 7 Seniority of employees who are hired on the same day shall be detennined by the previous written Civil Service Test Scores of the affected employees not including any points given for veterans. The employee with the higher previous written test score shall be given the higher seniority Section 8 For purposes ofthis Article and for definitional purposes throughout every Article ofthis Agreement part-time employees andor part-time police officers shall be defined as those police officers who are regularly scheduled for work less than forty (4) hours per week. The irregular or occasional scheduling of a part-time police officer for forty (4) hours per week or more than forty (4) hours per week shall not alter the part-time employees status.

Section 9 Layoffs shall be made first from among part-time employees in inverse order ofseniority and then from among full-time employees in inverse order of seniority. Recalls from layoffshall be made first from among full-time employees in order of seniority and then from among part-time employees in order of seniority. Full-time officers shall be recalled to part-time positions prior to part-time officers being recalled to part-time positions. However in no event shall the City employ an additional part-time position without first refilling the full-time position. Said procedure shall apply until every full-time employee who had been laid off is recalled to a full-time position.

 3  ARTICLE NO. 6 - COMPENSATION Section 1 Hourly Wages The following are the job classifications of the employees covered by this Agreement and the basic hourly wage rate of compensation such employees shall be paid in their respective job classifications.

Job Classification  1-1-219 $2.25  1-1-22 $1.75  1-1-221 $1.25  1-1-222 $1.

 $26.8  $27.83  $29.8  $3.8  $25.41  $27.16  $28.41  $29.41  $18.31  $18.81  $19.31  $19.81  $17.81  $18.31  $18.81  $19.31  Full-time Sergeant Full-time Patrolman Part-time Patrolman Part-time Patrolman (Probationary)  Wage Proression for Full-Time Officers  1 st year of service  9 of Base Hourly Rate of Pay  2 nd year of service  1 of Base Hourly Rate of Pay  I  Section 2 - Officer-in-Charge In the absence of a Sergeant on a shift the Chief of Police shall name the most qualified full-time officer of that shift shall as the .1.C. for that shift and receive Sergeants rate of pay for all hours worked as the O.1.C. Should two (2) Sergeants work the same shift the senior Sergeant shall be the Sergeant in charge however both Sergeants shall receive Sergeants rate ofpay.

Section 3 Police Dog All K-9 Officers shall be reimbursed fifteen (15) minutes (7) seven days per week one and one-half (1 ) times their regular hourly rate for their responsibilities in caring for and maintaining care at home for their K-9 dog. Additionally the Employer shall pay for any and all reasonable and necessary veterinarian bills incurred for the police dog.

A. While the officer given the assignment of housing feeding cleaning handling maintaining and being responsible for the police dog owned by the Employer is employed the police dog owned by the Employer shall not perform any services or work for any other police department other governmental agency employer or any other person whatsoever except with the specific written consent of the Employer.

B. The parties agree and acknowledge that this provision regarding police dog is entered into due to the unique and unusual circumstances surrounding the relationship of the police dog owned by the Employer and the police officer given the assignment of housing feeding 4  cleaning handling maintaining and being responsible for the police dog owned by the Employer.

C. The parties agree and acknowledge that the police dog owned by the Employer shall always remain the property of the Employer and the police officer given the assignment of housing feeding cleaning handling maintaining and being responsible for the police dog owned by the Employer shall never acquire any ownership interest in said police dog unless the parties agree otherwise in writing.

Section 4 Uniform Allowance Tue Employer shall provide each full-time employee annually during the tenn ofthis Agreement a uniform allowance provided the full-time employee has worked at least four hundred and twenty-five (425) hours in the preceding calendar year as follows Year 1  $55.

Year 2  $6.

Year 3  $65.

Year 4  $7.

Part-time officers will be responsible for paying for their own uniforms when initially hired. The City will reimburse the part-time officer at a rate offifty ($ .5) cents per hour up to a maximum of three hundred ($3.) dollars. Part-time officers must also provide their own bullet proof vest approved by the City of Clairton. Newly hired part-time officers shall be provided with two (2) uniform shirts and two (2) pair ofuniform pants. If the officer resigns from the City within ninety (9) days ofhis hire date he shall reimburse the city the cost of shirts and pants.

Employees shall be permitted to wear B.D.U. s dickies or turtlenecks for winter uniforms.

Employees working any other shift than daylight Monday through Friday shall be permitted to wear B.D.U. s all year rowid.

Section 5 Court Time - Off Duty A. Time spent by employees in attendance in Court as a result of a matter arising from the scope of their employment as a police officer for the Employer in any criminal quasi-criminal or civil matter or proceeding outside regular duty hours shall be compensated at the employees base hourly rate for all hours spent in attendance or a minimum of four (4) hours whichever is greater less any witness fees received by the employee for such appearances. In the event that such attendance is required before a Magisterial District Judge the minimum period for compensation pursuant to this section shall be two (2) hours.

Part-time officers shall be entitled to aforementioned minimum hours of compensation for attending court proceedings on the behalf of the City of Clairton paid at the officers prevailing straight time up to forty (4) hours. Court time shall count as hours worked when calculating overtime with all hours above forty (4) paid at time and one half ( I ).

 5  B. In addition to the above compensation the employee shall also be paid mileage computed form the employees duty station to the location of said proceeding and return therefrom ifa privately owned vehicle is required to be used. The mileage to be paid by the Employer under this section shall be paid at the highest rate approved by the IRS for Pennsylvania.

C. fu detennining whether an employee is entitled to compensation as overtime for attendance  in Court as set forth in Subsection A. above said employee shall be considered off duty at any time which is not part of the employees regularly scheduled shift.

 D. The provisions of this article shall apply for time spent as a witness for an Investigating Grand Jury Criminal Trials Criminal Pre-Trial Hearings Sentence Court Civil Court Coroners Inquest A.RD. Hearings Plea Bargaining Sessions Miscellaneous Court Hearings Hearings before the Department of Revenue or Transportation Hearing Examiner Hearings before a PLCB Hearing Examiner hearings before other Commonwealth of Pennsylvania agencies or any other Court or Court-related sessions which occur during the officers off duty time as set forth in this Article wherein the officer appears as a prosecutor or witness in connection with the officers official duties.

E. If an officer severs his employment with the City of Clairton and is subpoenaed to court to testify on behalf of the City he shall be compensated for time spent in trial under Section 5.

Court-Time-Off Duty.

Section 6 Court time - On Duty An officer called or subpoenaed as a witness to appear in any court or administrative hearing on employer business during his regular work schedule shall be paid his regular contract rate ofpay for the hours spent at the court or administrative hearing less any witness fees received by the employee for such appearances.

Section 7 Training or Certification Time An employee who is scheduled or ordered by the Employer to attend or participate in State-Mandated or City-Mandated Training or Certification Sessions or Classes shall be compensated at the employees regular contract rate ofpay commencing with the time the trainmg or certification classes begin and continuing until such classes or sessions end. If such classes or sessions are held outside of the limits of the City of Clairton then the employee shall be compensated for the time ofthe classes or sessions plus travel time commencing at the time when the employee leaves the City of Clairton and continuing until the employee returns to the City of Clairton and by the employee traveling the normal reasonable and shortest route of travel between the City of Clairton and the location of the training or certification sessions except if it is closer for the employee to travel to and from his home to the training or certification session. In such instance the employee shall be compensated at bis regular contract rate of pay for the travel time to and from bis home.

 ARTICLE NO. 7 - HOURS OF WORK AND WORK SCHEDULES Section 1 The Employer reserves the exclusive right to determine work schedules including whether or not to call out additional officers and to detepnine the number of employees with a 6  minimum of two (2) officers per shift to be used during any work shift in accordance with the terms of this Agreement.

Section 2 The workday shall be defined herein as twenty-four (24) consecutive hours commencing with the employees shift starting hour.

Section 3 8 Hour Work Schedule . A. A regular work week shall consist of five (5) consecutive eight (8) hour days all the same shift with two (2) consecutive days off. Work weeks shall begin at 121 a.m. Sunday and conclude at 12  midnight the following Saturday. It is understood that there shall be times when an employee may have to work up to a maximum of ten (1) consecutive days. In those situations which could extend over two (2) calendar weeks such situations ofworking up to a maximum of ten (1) consecutive days will not cause the employer to be in violation of Section 4 of this Article which pertains to overtime pay.

 B. Time and one-half (1-12) shall be paid for all hours worked in excess of forty (4) hours during any regular work week or in excess of eight (8) hours during a single work shift but not both so that no pyramiding of overtime shall be permitted.

Section 4 12-hour Work Schedule.

A. A shift shall be considered as worked on the day in which the majority of the hours are worked. If the City utilizes the twelve-hour schedule provided for in ARTICLE NO. 7 HOURS OF WORK AND WORK SCHEDULES of this Agreement and patrol officers begin work at 6 PM the shift shall be considered worked on the day in which the officer begins his shift.

 B. Under the twelve-hour schedule a normal shift shall fall within plus or minus one hundred twenty (12) minutes of-the stipulated start time.

C. Each shift shall include a lunch break ofup to forty-five (45) minutes. Each shift break shall in addition include two (2) reasonable breaks of not more than fifteen (15) minutes each. If the City utilizes the twelve-hour schedule provided for in ARTICLE NO. 7 - HOURS OF WORK AND WORK SCHEDULES of this Agreement patrol officers working the 12-our schedule will be entitled to two (2) thirty (3)-minute meal breaks that are separated by at least one (1) hour.

D. A bi-weekly schedule of working days which confirms to the pay periods shall be posted twenty (2) days prior to the effective date of the schedule. Once posted changes can be made by the City if necessary provided the affected officers are given seventy-two (72) hour notice of the changes. Ifpossible changes will be made on a seniority basis. If the changes must be made because an officer has elected to take an individual vacation day or personal day then the affected officers are to be given a forty-eight (48) hour notice of the changes.

7  E. If the City utilizes the twelve-hour schedule provided for in ARTICLE NO. 7 - HOURS OF WORK AND WORK SCHEDULES of this Agreement patrol officers working a twelve (12) hour shift will receive a minimum of ten (1 O) hours off between shifts.

F. If the City utilizes the twelve-hour schedule provided for ARTICLE NO. 7 - HOURS OF WORK AND WORK SCHEDULES of this Agreement patrol officers working a twelve (12) hour shift will receive two (2) consecutive days off per week except in situations where doing so interferes with the ability to schedule training.

G. Officers will be pennitted to trade working days with other officers provided that they submit a notice of trade to the Police Chief as far in advance as possible but not less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the shift change. Such a request shall not be unreasonably denied. The officer who accepts a trade is responsible for the shift not the officer originally scheduled.

When an officer trades away a shift he shall not be eligible for overtime for that shift nor shall he be subject to being ordered out to work.

E. The City will utilize a twelve (12) hour work schedule for officers assigned to patrol duty equaling an eighty-four (84) hour pay period.

Section 5 Narcotics Detectives should be flexible with their schedule and shall work a forty (4) hour work week not a twelve hour work schedule.

Section 6 It is understood that the employer retains sole discretion to determine the number of employees if any to be used on overtime in accordance with this Agreement.

Section 7 When a situation occurs that imposes a threat to the publics health safety or welfare it is agreed that any employee may be assigned to the abatement of that situation regardless of whether the work is overtime or not without violating this Agreement.

Section 8 All employees shall be required to work overtime in the event of an emergency that necessitates the working of such overtime.

Section 9 An employee called into work at a time when he is not regularly scheduled except for those witness fee situations described in Article No. 6 Sections 5 and 6 shall be guaranteed a minimum of four (4) hours pay unless the employee is scheduled for work immediately preceding or following the non-regularly scheduled work time. In such instance the employee shall not be guaranteed any minimum hours of pay. For ex.ample if the employee is scheduled to work the 7  a.m. to 3  p.m. work shift and is required to stay beyond the end ofthat work shift until 5 p.m.

he shall only be entitled to the actual time worked of two (2) hours.

Section 1 Overtime pay shall be paid no later than the regular payday in the pay period following the period in which the overtime is worked. Overtime pay for the Task Force shall be paid as soon as the Employer is reimbursed by the State.

8  Section 11 All part-time police officers shall be offered work hours on the regular police schedule on the basis of seniority so that the most senior part-time police officers shall not be offered any less hours ofwork per week on the regular work schedule than other part-time police officers with lesser seniority are offered. However if the more senior part-time police officer refuses the additional hours of work per week on the regular police schedule and the additional work hours are given to a less senior part-time police officer then such more senior part-time police officer is not entitled to payment for such hours not actually worked.

Only in cases of special events the Chief may schedule part-time officers to a four (4) hour shift.

This provision is in no way meant circumvent overtime for full-time officers as set forth in this Agreement.

Section 12 Uniformed employees shall be permitted to bid for A.

 B.

C.

 Shift assignments  Scheduled leave days Vacation time on the basis of seniority. Bidding shall take place once every year.

The shift schedule shall be posted not less than twenty (2) days prior to the effective date.

 For reasons ofpublic safety the Employer may modify schedules and make temporary shift assignments. However such temporary assignments shall not be made unreasonably.

Section 13 - Overtime Call Out Procedure - The Chiefof Police will make every reasonable effort to  schedule overtime both scheduled and unscheduled and including holidays in accordance with the  seniority list of all full-time officers. The Chief of Police in assigning scheduled and unscheduled overtime will begin with the most senior full-time officer and then follow a rotating system until the overtime assignment is filled. Such overtime list will be posted in the Station. Should an officer be unreasonably bypassed for an overtime assignment said officer will be given the next opportunity to work an overtime assignment so that the overtime will be equalized. However in no event will an officer be paid bypass pay.

If an officer calls off for a shift and the Overtime list is used in which no officer elects to take the overtime then the least senior officer on the current shift is required to work the overtime unless the officer has less than twelve (12) months of seniority working for the City of Clairton in which case the next senior officer on the shift would be required to stay and cover the shift.

Officers shall not be pennitted to work more than eighteen (I 8) consecutive hours per shift which would include an officers regularly scheduled shift and overtime hours.

 Section 14 Officers shall be paid the appropriate overtime rate for all hours worked in excess of the posted schedule eighty (8) hours for an eight (8) hour schedule and eighty-four (84) hours for a twelve (12) hour schedule.

 9  Section 15 The City shall have the right to install a time clock to accurately record hours worked said time clock shall not be used for court time.

 ARTICLE NO. 8 - SICK LEAVE Section 1 All full-time employees except as limited by Section 2 below hired prior to January 1 215 shall be given one (1) day of sick leave per month for a total oftwelve (12) sick days per year.

Officers following a twelve (12) hour schedule shall be awarded ninety-six (96) hours per year or eight (8) hours a month.

Effective January 1 215 sick leave for new full-time employees hired after January 1 215 shall receive the following sick leave After one (1) year  eight (8) sick days or sixty-four (64) hours After two (2) years  nine (9) sick days or seventy-two (72) hours After tluee (3) years ten (1) sick days or eighty (8) hours After four (4) years  eleven (11) sick days or eighty-eight (88) hours After five (5) years twelve (12) sick days or ninety-six (96) hours Sick time may be used in advance. Any officer terminating their employment with the City of Clairton and who has used sick time in advance shall reimburse the City all time owed on a pro-rated basis. Such amount shall be withheld for the employees final pay check.

Any unused sick leave may be accumulated from year to year to a maximum of fifty (5) fifty days for current full-time officers. Any full-time employee who talces sick leave for more than three (3) consecutive days shall be required to produce a Doctors excuse or certificate immediately upon his return to work so as to prevent sick leave abuse.

Sick leave shall not be provided to any part-time employees.

Section 2 Any full-time employee who is granted a discretionary leave of absence for more than thirty (3) days pursuant to Article No. 21 Section 2 of this Agreement shall not accrue or be given any sick leave under this Article for the entire length of the discretionary leave of absence.

Section 3 If an officer severs his employment with the City of Clairton the City shall buy back unused sick days up to a maximum of one hundred (1) days at the rate of fifty percent (5) of his regular daily rate.

Section 4 An officer may choose to sell back any unused sick days at the end of the year up to a maximum of sixty (6) days or a maximum of four hundred and eighty (48) hours at fifty percent (5) of his regular daily rate.

 1  ARTICLE NO. 9 - VACATION Section 1 Eligibility All full-time employees shall get a vacation in any vacation year during the term of this Agreement when he or she has completed at least one (1) year of continuous service as full-time employee on or before December 31 of the preceding year (the vacation eligibility year).

Section 2 Length of Vacation The following annual paid vacations will be provided to full-time employees Vacation for Employees hired after to January 1 21 S  Vacation for Employees hired before to January 1 2 l S Length of Service After 1 year After 5 years After 1 years After 15 years  Length of Service After 1 year After 3 years After 5 years After 1 years After 15 years  Vacation Leave 2 weeks 3 weeks 4 weeks 5 weeks  Vacation Leave 1 week 2 weeks 3 weeks 4weeks 5 weeks  If the City utilizes the twelve (12) - hour schedule provided for in ARTICLE NO. 7 - HOURS OF WORK AND WORK SCHEDULES of this Agreement patrol officers shall receive vacation according to the following table Vacation for Employees hired before to January 1 215 Length of Service After 1 year After 5 years After 1 years After 15 years  Vacation for Employees hired after to January 1 215  Vacation Leave 8 hours 12 hours 16 hours 2 hours  Length of Service After 1 year After 3 years After 5 years After 1 years After 15 years  Vacation Leave 4 hours 8 hours 12 hours 16 hours -2 hours  Vacation will be taken in twelve (12)-hour blocks except that any residual hours can be taken as partial days. Only one (1) patrol officer per shift may be off on vacation at a time.

Annual vacations shall be scheduled and used during the year in which it is accrued.

Section 3 The Chief of Police or his designee shall schedule full-time employees work so as to enable each full-time employee to take vacation which he becomes entitled to during the year.

Vacation leave shall be granted at such times as are detennined by the Employer to be consistent with the provision of full services to the public and in the best interests of the Police Department.

Vacation leave shall not accumulate from year to year.

 11  Section 4 Each week of vacation shall consist of seven (7) consecutive calendar days which constitute the full-time employees normal workweek. The full-time employee will be paid for only five (5) days or forty (4) hours pay at the full-time employees regular straight time hourly wage rate for each week of vacation.

If the City utilizes the twelve-hour schedule provided for in Article No. 7 - Hours or Working Conditions of this Agreement in posting vacation preferences a patrol officer must request his vacation in a minimum of a thirty (36) hour blocks. Vacation will be allowed to extend from one work week to the next as long as the vacation is consecutive. (For example Friday Saturday Sunday.) Section 5 Annual vacation schedules shall be posted by the Employer on or before January 1 ofeach year and shall encompass the period from January 1 through December 31 and must be completed by the full-time employees and returned to the Employer on or before March 1 of each year. The l vacation schedules shall be posted in the Police Station and al fifty-two weeks of the calendar year must be available for selection except that the Chief of Police may limit the maximum number of full-time employees to be afforded vacation at any one time.

Section 6 Selection of vacation will be on a seniority basis with each full-time officer posting at least one (1) week or all of his vacation time when his tum in the schedule appears. If the full-time officer selects only one ( 1) week he may not select additional time until the list has been completely rotated. Full-time employees may take one (1) week oftheir vacation time in single day increments.

If a vacation must be canceled the full-time officer canceling his vacation may not bump a junior full-time officer from his posted vacation unless his cancellation was departmentally implemented.

Section 7 Full-time employees shall be required to take time offfor their vacations. Once vacations are scheduled and approved they may not be changed without approval of the Chief of Police. A full-time employee whose vacation is canceled by the Department and who thereby suffers out-of pocket financial loss shall be made whole by the Employer and shall be given a later opportunity within the calendar year to talce his vacation.

 Section 8 If a holiday occurs during a full-time employees vacation period the full-time employee shall have the option of receiving an extra days pay consisting of eight (8) hours at straight hourly rate of pay or an extra vacation day as a substitute for the holiday but not both.

Section 9 Vacation entitlement may be used in conjunction with regularly scheduled days off provided said days off are approved by the Chief.

Section 1 If a full-time employee with one or more years of service dies or retires prior to the completion of a credit year he shall receive vacation pay pro-rated in accordance with the number of complete months worked in the credit year.

 12  Section 11  All part-time officers with a minimum of three (3) years of service and having worked one thousand forty (14) hours in the preceding year shall be entitled to a week ofvacation in their fourth (4th) year of employment and every year thereafter. A years service shall be considered as having worked a minimwn of one thousand forty (14) hours the previous year. For example an officer who works less than one thousand forty (14) total hours the previous year shall not receive credit for a years service. Total hours shall include regular and overtime hours.

A week of vacation for part-time officers shall be equal to their average days of work per week. For example if the officer averages sixteen (16) hours per week hisher week of vacation shall consist of sixteen (16) hours vacation with pay if the officer averages twenty-four (24) hours per week hisher vacation shall consist of twenty-four (24) hours of vacation with pay.

 ARTICLE NO. 1 - HOLIDAYS Section 1 The following eleven (11) holidays shall be observed as paid holidays for full-time employees covered in this Agreement New Years Day Martin Luther King Day Good Friday Memorial Day  Fourth Of July Labor Day Veterans Day Thanksgiving Day  Day After Thanksgiving Day Christmas Day Day After Christmas Day  Part-time employees shall not be entitled to any paid holidays. However part-time employees shall be paid 1-12 times their regular hourly rate of pay for all holidays worked.

Section 2 Any full-time employee who is scheduled to work on any of the holidays set forth in Section 1 shall be compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1-12) times his regular rate of pay for all hours worked on the holiday plus eight (8) hours ofholidaypay regardless ifworking an eight (8) or twelve (12) hour schedule. For example if a full-time employee works a holiday instead of getting the holiday off he shall be paid a total of two and one-half (2-12) times his regular rate of pay for the first eight (8) hours and time and one half (I ) for each subsequent hour. Officers not scheduled to work shall receive eight (8) hours of holiday pay regardless of their current work schedule.

Section 3 In order to be eligible for holiday pay as provided for in this Article the full-time employee must work his regularly scheduled work day immediately prior to said holiday and his regularly scheduled w orkday immediately after said holiday unless he is absent because of bereavement leave sick leave vacation or jury duty.

Section 4 In the case of call-off on any of the observed holidays contained herein the officer shall forfeit holiday pay.

 13  ARTICLE NO. 11  PERSONAL DAY Each full.time police officer shall receive two (2) personal leave days per calendar year. The personal leave days shall be granted at the time chosen by the employee unless operational needs of the Employer prohibit utilization of a personal leave day. It is specifically understood that a personal leave day should not be unreasonably denied. Part-time employees shall not be entitled to any personal leave days.

For the purpose of personal days an officer following a twelve (12) hour work schedule shall be entitled to twelve (12) hours of persona) time off. Officers following an eight (8) hour work schedule shall be entitled to eight (8) hours of personal time off.

ARTICLE NO. 12 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE Section 1 In case of death in the immediate family full-time employees shall be entitled to a maximum of three (3) consecutive days leave with pay if the full-time employee had been previously scheduled for work. The maximum period of time of such leave shall include the day of the funeral of the member of the immediate family or the day following the date of death of the member of the immediate family and shall not ex.tend beyond the day of the burial or cremation of the member of the immediate family. If a full-time employee has not otherwise been scheduled for work during this maximum period of time such full-time employee shall not be entitled to bereavement leave. hnmediate family is defined as parents children spouse siblings step-parents grandparents grandchildren step-children mother-in-law and father-in-law. The rate of pay shall consist of the full-time employees regular base salary rate per scheduled work day. The intent ofthe parties is to pennit full-time employees time off in the event ofbereavement without loss of regular pay. Part-time employees shall not be entitled to any bereavement leave whatsoever except as provided in Section 2 below.

Section 2 All part-time employees who have worked a minimum of 832 hours in each of the three (3) preceding calendar years shall be entitled in case of death in the immediate family to a maximum of three (3) consecutive days leave with pay if the part-time employee had been previously scheduled for work. The maximum period of time of such leave shall commence on the day of death of the member of the immediate family or the day following the date of death of the member of the immediate family and shall not extend beyond the day of the burial or cremation of the member ofthe inunediate family. If a part-time employee has not otherwise been scheduled for work during this maximum period of time such part-time employee shall not be entitled to bereavement leave. Immediate family is defined as parents children spouse siblings step-parents grandparents grandchildren step-children mother-in-law and father-in-law. The rate of pay shall consist of the part-time employees regular base salary rate per scheduled work day. The intent of the parties is to permit part-time employees who have worked a minimum of 832 hours in the preceding calendar year time off in the event ofbereavement without loss ofregular pay. If the part time employee fails to work a minimum of 832 hours in any preceding calendar year then he shall not be entitled to any bereavement leave in any successive calendar year.

 14  ARTICLE NO. 13 - MILITARY SERVICE  Employees who enter the Anned Services of the United States or who have left or who subsequent to the date of this Agreement leave their position for the purpose of being inducted into enlisting determining their physical fitness to enter or to perform training duty in said Armed Forces shall be reinstated in accordance with the applicable Federal Statutes.

ARTICLE NO. 14 - PENSION  RETIREMENT BENEFITS  All full-time employees shall be entitled to pension and retirement benefits in accordance with the Police Pension Plan Agreement between the City of Clairton and the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board dated October 8 1991 an exact copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit A as amended by an Addendum to said Agreement between the City of Clairton and the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board dated January 14 1992 an exact copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit B. Part-time employees shall not be entitled to any pension and retirement benefits. All mandatory but not permissive provisions of Act 3 shall apply to the pension plan.

The City of Clairton agrees to work with PMRS to be in compliance with the Third Class City Pension laws.

ARTICLE NO. 15 - JOB STEWARDS  Section 1 The Employer recognizes the right of the Union to designate its Job Stewards and alternates. The authority of Job Stewards and alternates so designated by the Union shall be limited and shall not exceed the following duties and activities A. Investigation and presentation of grievances in accordance with the provisions of the Collective Bargaining Agreement.

B. The transmission of such messages and information which shall originate with and are authorized by the Local Union or its Officers provided such messages and information (1) have been reduced to writing or (2) if not reduced to writing are of a routine nature and do not involve work stoppage slowdowns or refusal to obey orders or any other interference with the Employers business.

Section 2 Job Stewards and alternates have no authority to take strike action or any other action interrupting the Employers business.

Section 3 The Employer recognizes these limitations upon the authority of the job stewards and their alternates and shall not hold the Union liable for any unauthorized acts. The Employer in so recognizing such limitations shall have authority to impose proper discipline including discharge in 15  the event that the Job Steward has taken unauthorized strike action slowdown activity or any work stoppage or work interference or has acted in a manner indicating his approval ofsame in violation of this Agreement.

Section 4 Job Stewards shall be permitted to investigate present and process grievances on or off the property ofthe Employer. Such investigation presentation and processing shall take place during the Job Stewards non-working time except that the Job Steward may have a maximum of one (I) hour during any workweek to participate in a Step Two Grievance Meeting which is held at a time when the Job Steward is scheduled for work. Such one (1) hour shall be considered a working hour in computing daily andor weekly overtime.

ARTICLE NO. 16 - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE SECTION 1  A grievance is a dispute concerning the interpretation application or alleged violation ofthe specific tenns or provisions of this Agreement. Any grievance arising between the Employer and the Union or an employee represented by the Union shall be settled in the following manner A. Step One - Within five (5) workdays of the date a grievance arises the employee shall discuss the grievance with the CHIEF OF POLICE or in the event ofhis unavailability his designated representative. If the grievance is not resolved to the mutual satisfaction of the parties then the grievance may be appealed by the Union andor the employee to the CITY MANAGER within five (5) workdays following receipt ofthe written response ofthe person to whom the initial grievance was given.

B. STEP TWO - The CITY MANAGER shall within five (5) workdays after receipt of the appeal meet with the aggrieved employee bis Job Steward and the Unions Business Agent in an attempt to adjust the grievance. If the Grievance is not resolved to the mutual satisfaction of the parties then the Grievance may be further appealed by the Union andor the Employee to the CITY COUNCIL or a designated committee of the CITY COUNCIL within five (5) workdays following receipt of the written response of the City Manager.

C. STEP THREE - The CITY COUNCIL or a designated COMMITTEE of the CITY COUNCIL shall within five (5) workdays after receipt of the appeal meet with the aggrieved employee his Job Steward and the Unions Business Agent in an attempt to adjust the Grievance. Ifthe Grievance is not resolved to the mutual satisfaction of the parties after consideration by City Council or a desi gnated committee ofthe City Council then the Union andor the employee may proceed to STEP FOUR ARBITRATION.

D. STEP FOUR ARBITRATION - If the grievance has not been satisfactorily resolved at Step Three the Union may appeal to arbitration within ten (1) days after a decision at Step Three has been rendered by the City Council or a committee of the City Council. A request for arbitration shall be initiated by the Union serving notice in writing of an intent to proceed to arbitration upon the CITY MANAGER. The notice shall identify the Agreement provisions in dispute the issue(s) to be determined and the employee or employees involved. Upon 16  receipt of a notice requesting arbitration the parties shall attempt to select an arbitrator. Ifthe parties cannot voluntarily agree upon the selection of an arbitrator they shall notify the State Mediation and Conciliation Service oftheir desire to have that Service submit to the parties a panel of seven (7) arbitrators. The parties shall then select the impartial arbitrator from such list by each party alternately removing one name fonn the list until but one name remains.

The person remaining shall be the arbitrator. The Employer and the Union shall alternate in striking the first name from such lists during the term of this Agreement.

SECTION 2 The arbitrators decision shall be in writing unless the parties and the Arbitrator  otherwise agree. The arbitrator shall be without power or authority to make any decision which requires the commission of an act prohibited by law or not authorized by law or which is violation of the tenns of this Agreement. Further the arbitrator shall have no power or authority to add to subtract from or modify the provisions of this Agreement. Unless timely appealed pursuant to applicable statute and law the arbitrators decision shall be final and binding on all parties.

SECTION 3 The grievance may be withdrawn by the Union or the aggrieved employee at anytime and the withdrawal of any grievance shall not be prejudicial to the positions taken by the parties as they relate to that grievance or any future grievance.

SECTION 4 Time limits set forth in the Grievance Procedure herein shall unless extended by mutual written agreement of the Employer and the Union be binding upon the parties and any grievance not filed within such time limits shall not be subject to further grievance or arbitration.

Further such grievance shall e considered settled on the basis of the decision rendered at the last level to which the grievance was carried. Weekends and holidays do not count.

SECTION 5 Cost ofArbitration The expense of the impartial arbitrator selected the hearing room and the transcript of the testimony if the parties mutually agree upon having the testimony of the hearing transcribed shall be borne equally by the Employer and the Union. The fees paid to the arbitrator shall be based on the schedule established by the Pennsylvania Bureau of Mediation.

ARTICLE NO. 17 - SUSPENSION ANDOR DISCHARGE Section 1 The Employer retains the right to suspend andor discharge any employee. In all cases involving discharge or suspension of an employee the Employer must notify the employee in writing ofhis discharge or suspension and the reason(s) therefore. Such written notice shall also be given to the Job Steward and a copy mailed to the Union Office within forty-eight (48) hours from the time of discharge or suspension.

Section 2 A suspended andor discharged employee who believes he was not suspended andor discharged for just cause must notify the Employer in writing within five (5) working days after receiving notification of such action against him of his desire to appeal the suspension andor discharge. In such event the grievance shall then be handled in accordance with the grievance procedure set forth in this Agreement starting with Step Two. Ifsuch a notice and complaint is not given the matter shall be deemed closed.

17  ARTICLE NO. 18 - HEALTH AND WELFARE PROGRAM Section 1  Hospitalization - Medical - Dental - Vision Employees shall receive medical dental and vision benefits through the W estem Pennsylvania Teamsters  Employers Welfare Fund PPO Blue Benefits Plan 9CF. Employer will pay one hundred (1) percent of the premium except for the premium share contribution required of employees as set forth in Section 8 of this Article. The Employer shall pay all annual premium increases up to five percent (5) per year ofan established base. Any increase of the premium above the five percent (5) limit shall be the responsibility ofthe employee. Any increase in the premium paid by the Employer will establish a new base. The following is an example ofhow the five percent (5) premium increase base would be established  Example 6-1-214 Base Year Cost- $1227.35 per employee City pays $1227.35 per month Employees pay$ -215 - Monthly premium increases to $1377.35 an increase of$15..

The City would pay 5 of $1227.35 or $61. 3 7 of the increase.

Employees would pay $88.63 of the increase.

City pays $1288.72 per month Employees pay $88.63 per month. New Base is $1288.72 216 - Monthly premium increases to $1427.35 an increase of$5..

The City would pay 5 of $1 288.72 or $64.44 of any increase.

City pays $1338.72 per month Employees would pay $88.63 per month.

New Base is $1338.72 217 - Monthly premium decreases to $13.

Base for the City is $1338.72 City pays $13. per month Employees would pay $-- per month.

Base remains at $1338.72 217 - Monthly premium decreases to $15.

Base for the City is $1338.72 City pays $15. per month Employees would pay $-- per month.

Base remains at $1338.72 Section 2 The Employer and the Union agree should the Health and Welfare premiums exceoo the five percent (5 ) per year maximum increase the Employer and the Union will meet to discuss other options of Health Care. The Employer shall noti fy the Union and Employees with-in five (5 ) business days of receipt ofthe notification of increased premiums that will exceed the five percent (5) maximum.

18  Section 3 Out of Pocket Expenses The out-of-pocket expenses required by the 9 CF Plan shall be paid by both the Employer and the Employee. The Employer shall be responsible for eighty percent (8) of the out-of-pocket expenses and the Employee shall be responsible for the remaining twenty percent (2). The Employee contribution shall be made via payroll deduction.

Section 4 Life htsurance Employees shall be covered by the following Life Insurance Program as part of the 9A Plan A. Life Insurance During Employment B. Accidental Death and Dismembennent  $25.

$25.

 Section 5 Part-time employees shall not be entitled to any Hospitalization and Medical Benefits or Health and Welfare Program Benefits under this Article.

Section 6 Sick and Accident Benefits Employees shall have the following Sick and Accident Program for a non-work related sickness andor accident A. Two Hundred Fi fty dollars ($25.) per week for twenty-six (26) weeks with benefits starting on the first day in the event of an accident and on the fifth (5 th) day in the event of sickness.

B. Vacation is to be used as vacation only - not to be used before you are eligible for sick benefits.

Section 7 Opting Out of Medical Coverge Employees who choose not to participate in the medical dental vision and life insurance program as set forth in Section 1 of this Article shall be entitled to receive an Opt-Out payment of one-half (12) of the monthly premium for said coverage provided such employee provides proof of alternative health coverage to the City to be eligible for the Opt Out payment. Such opting-out by an employee must occur prior to January 1 st of each calendar year thereafter and such opting-out payment shall be made by the City to the Employee in December of the applicable opting-out year provided the employee opts out for the entire twelve (12) month calendar year.

Section 8 Employee Contribution Employees shall pay one and one-half percent (1 )of their annual base salary on a monthly basis and via payroll deduction to the City as their premium share contribution for the Health and Welfare Program benefits specified in Section 1 of this Article.

 19  ARTICLE NO. 19 - FALSE ARREST INSURANCE The Employer shall provide false arrest insurance in the amount of$3. aggregate amount for each incident covering the employees which shall protect those employees from potential civil liabilities for work performed by police officers on behalf of the City and where the police officers are acting within the scope of their duty.

 ARTICLE NO. 2  POLICE OFFICERS BILL OF RIGHTS Section 1  When an anonymous complaint is made against a police officer and no corroborative evidence is obtained the complaint shall be classified as unfounded.

Section 2 At the request of a police officer under disciplinary interrogation he shall have the right to be represented by a union representative who shall be present at all times during the interrogation.

The interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonable time until representation can be obtained.

Section 3 The specific reasons for discipline or discharge should not nonnally be the subject of public comment by the City without consent of the police officer.

Section 4 At the request of any police officer he shall have the right to reasonable access to review his personnel file.

Section 5 When a citizen complaint is filed it must be done in writing signed by the complainant and filed no later than thirty (3) days from the alleged event unless extenuating circumstances exist.

Section 6 An internal investigation must take place concerning said complaint and all parties whether subject or witness must be part of such investigation.

Section 7 After said investigation all information should be corroborated and just cause must be found before charges are filed against any employee. The accused employee shall be notified orally or in writing of the complaint and be forwarded a copy of said complaint upon completions of the initial investigation if the Employer is going to file charges or take disciplinary action.

Section 8 A police officer whether subject or witness must be infonned of the nature of any questioning before the actual interrogation takes place.

Section 9 At the request ofany police officer heshe shall have the right to review hisher personnel file at reasonable intervals but no greater than three (3) times per year.

Section 1 The Employer agrees that any and all disciplinary action taken throughout this Agreement shall only be kept in an employees personnel file for eighteen (18) months for reprimands and twenty-four (24) months for suspensions from the date of the infraction and then the infraction shall be removed from hisher file except for violations by the employee covered under the Drug and Alcohol Policy. (Attached as Exhibit C)  2  ARTICLE NO. 21  MISCELLANEOUS Section 1 Any full-time employee who would otherwise be eligible for sick leave bereavement leave or jury duty leave and who fails to notify the Employer of his absence at least four (4) hours prior to his regularly scheduled starting time on the day of absence shall lose his days pay if any for such absence unless an emergency prevents such notification. This provision is only intended to apply to sick leave bereavement leave or jury duty leave the full-time employee would otherwise be entitled to.

Section 2 Leaves of absence paid or unpaid shall not be granted unless such individual leave is approved by the Employer and the Union.

Section 3 Any heading preceding the test of the several Articles contained in this Agreement is inserted solely for convenience of reference and shall not constitute a part of this Agreement nor shall the heading affect the meaning construction or effect of the Article.

Section 4 All existing benefits and practices previously enjoyed by the employees which are not modified by this Agreement shall remain as is except as inconsistent with any ofthe provisions of this Agreement or State or Federal Law. In case of such inconsistency then the provisions of this Agreement or State or Federal Law shall prevail.

Section 5 Jury Duty Any full-time employee who has been called for jury duty shall be compensated by the Employer the amount of money necessary to equal the difference between the full-time employees regular pay and the compensation such full-time employee received for jury duty.

A full-time employee excused fromjucy service shall report to work at the beginning of his next regularly scheduled shift. The full-time employee shall present proof of service ofa jury duty notice or summons and the amount of pay received for such service.

When a full-time employee receives notice that he is to report for jury duty he shall notify  the Chief of Police immediately.

The Employer reserves the right to request the court to release and relieve any full-time employee from jury duty.

No jury duty benefit shall be available to part-time police officers.

Section 6 Safety Clause The City shall enter into Mutual aid agreements with surrounding police departments as the City in its sole discretion deems appropriate.

Section 7 In the event that non-probationary part-time employees have fulfilled all eligibility requirements for hiring as full-time employee all full-time employees shall be hired from the existing pool of non-probationary part-time employees of the Employer.

21  Section 8 The City agrees to abide by all State and Governmental laws including but not limited to u Military Affairs Title 51 Chapter 41 pertaining to a fll-time officer being called to Military Service including but not limited to the continuation of all benefits and pay for as long as the law will allow.

Section 9 The City will set up a program with a third party mental health agency to aid any officer who is having problems because ofjob related stress provided that such a program is ofno cost to the City.

Section I  Paychecks - The City Finance Department will make paychecks available by 8 hours on the day of distribution provided however there will be no penalty in the event that some unforeseen problem delays distribution. In such event the Finance Department will make every reasonable effort to make paychecks available as soon after 8 hours as possible.

Section 11 Shift Switching - With the consent of the Chief of Police officers shall be permitted to switch shifts among themselves. However the following rules must apply 1. Officers involved must sign a switching slip.

2. At least forty-eight hours (48) prior notice must be given to the Chief of Police. The Chief can make exceptions in the case of an emergency.

3. No additional premium pay expense shall accrue the City. (other than what would have been payable had the switch not occurred.) 4. In emergency situations the above time limits may be waived at the Chiefs discretion on a case by case basis.

5. No full-time officer may switch with a probationary officer or a part-time officer with less than two (2) years of seniorit.y Section 12 Protective Vest - All full-time police officers shall be issued by the City every five (5) years a protective vest Any Officer who receives a vest and severs employment with the City shall reimburse a pro-rated portion of the total cost of the vest. Part-time officers shall be responsible to provide their own protective vest which must be approved by the City of Clairton.

Section 13 Team Legal Coverage - The City shall provide and pay the full cost of the Team Legal Criminal Defense fusurance for all officers. The cost of said coverage is currently $86.88 annually per officer and shall not increase above one hundred ($1.) dollars annually for the life of this agreement.

Section 14 Vehicle Clause- All marked police vehicles used in police duties shall be equipped with  a front mounted shotgun or rifle a protective screen separating the driver from the rear passenger seat and radio. Police vehicles shall maintain all State Inspection and safety standards.

Section 15 Toe necessary arrangements shall be made by the City of Clairton through their doctor at the expense of the City each officer be given the Hepatitis B vaccination.

 22  ARTICLE NO. 22  DRUG AND ALCOHOL USE IN THE WORKPLACE All employees covered by this Agreement shall be subject to the Policy of the Employer relating to Drug and Alcohol Use in the Workplace an exact copy of which is attached hereto as Exhibit C Any violation by any employee of said Policy of the Employer relating to Drug and Alcohol Use in the Workplace shall be subject to the grievance procedure specified in Article 16 herein.

 ARTICLE NO. 23 -LEGALITY Both parties agree that it is their intent that this Agreement under all circumstances and in every respect shall comply with all applicable statutes governmental regulations and judicial decisions. In the event that some aspect of this Agreement shall be found not to comply with applicable statutes governmental regulations and judicial decisions the parties shall immediately bargain concerning adjustments in the agreement designed to make the Agreement comply with the applicable statute governmental regulation or judicial decision with which it is at odds.

 ARTICLE NO. 24 - SEPARABILITY In the event any of these tenns or provisions of this Agreement shall be found invalid or declared unenforceable by reason of any Federal or State Statute of Federal or State directive rule or regulations now in effect or hereinafter to become effective or by reason of the decision of any Federal or State Court such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect or impair any other terms ofprovisions hereof unless the other terms or provisions are directly affected by the section declared invalid or unenforceable. The parties thereupon may within thirty (3) days meet to discuss said invalidity or unenforceability.

 ARTICLE NO. 25 - NOWAIVER OF DEFAULT The failure of either party to insist upon strict performance of any of the provisions of this Agreement shall in no way affect the right of such party hereafter to enforce the same nor shall the waiver of any breach of the provisions hereof be construed as a waiver of any breach of subsequent default of the same or similar nature nor shall it be construed as a waiver of strict performance of any other obligations herein.

 ARTICLE NO. 26 -MODIFICATION This Agreement shall not be modified in whole or in part by the parties except by an instrument in writing duly executed by both parties.

 23  ARTICLE NO. 27 - EFFECTIVE DATES This Agreement shall be effective from January I 219 to December 31 222. It is further agreed that in accordance with the provisions of Act 111 on the request of either party hereto the parties will meet for the purpose of negotiating a contract to be effective January 1 223.

 FOR CITY OF CLAJRTON  FOR TEAMSTERS LOCAL 25  Co.

 CarlA.

 Date  12.- ) -   24  Exhibit A THE CITY OF CLAIRTON POLICE PENSION PLAN AGREEMENT AN AGREEMENT dated this 8 th day of October 1991 by and between the City of Clairton and the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board (the Board) WHEREAS Article N Section 41 of the Act of February 1 1974 No. 15 states 41. This article shall provide for the enrollment of those municipalities in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System which want to offer retirement benefits to their employees.

and WHEREAS the City of Clairton desires to establish a police pension plan with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System and has negotiated an optional retirement plan contract with the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System for the police officers NOW THEREFORE the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board and the City of Clairton hereby agree to the following retirement pension plan for th e police officers 1. Coverage This plan shall cover all full-time members of the police department hereafter referred to as member ofthe City. Membership for elected officials and employees hired on a temporary or seasonal basis is prohibited as is membership for individuals paid only on a fee basis. Individual membership shall be effective as of the date the City entered into the Pennsylv ania Municipal Retirement System or upon the expiration of the individuals probationary status whichever is more recent.

Credited service shall accrue from the original members date of hire as long as there is continuous uninterrupted employment to the municipality. Credited service time earned prior to the enrollment of the City into the System shall be known as prior service.

No credited service time shall be granted for time employed in a status other than active employee of the municipality excluding credit for purchased military service reinstatement ofprevious or service earned and credited rmder Section 11 the portability section of this agreement.

2. Superannuation Retirement Eligibility for a superannuation shall be dependent upon the following grade to which the member belongs Grade C - All members whose permanent date of employment was after November 24 1987 shall be eligible for superannuation retirement upon the completion of twenty-flve (25) years of credited service and the attainment of at least age fifty-five (55).

 25  As of the date ofthis Agreement all members of the previous pension plan who will be enrolled as members of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System meet the above Classification of member.

3. Basic Benefit The basic annual benefit shall be  For members classified as Grade C equal to two percent (2) of the members final salary multiplied by all years of credited service provided however in no event shall the basic benefit exceed fifty percent (5) of the members final salary.

4. Final Salary The final salary shall be the average annual rate of compensation being paid the member at the time of retirement or the annual average compensation of the highest five (5) consecutive years of employment which every is greater.

 5. Permanent Disability Benefits A member may upon application or on application of one acting in the members behalf or upon application of a responsible official of the municipality be retired by the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board on a disability allowance if the physician designated by the Board after medical examination ofthe member shall certify to the Board that the individual is unable to engage in any gainful employment and that said member ought to be retired.

A disability annuity payable from the total disability reserve account which together with the municipal annuity and the members annuity if any shall be sufficient to produce a retirement allowance of fifty percent (5) of the members final salary.

Should a disability annuitant die before the total disability retirement allowance received equals the amount of the members accwnulated deductions at the time of disability retirement the Board shall pay to the named beneficiary (ifliving or if the named beneficiary predeceased the annuitant or no beneficiary was named then to the annuitants estate) an amount equal to the difference between such total retirement allowance received and the annuitants accwnulated deductions. If such difference is less than one hwidred dollars ($1) and no letters have been taken out on the estate within six (6) months after the disability annuitants death such difference may be paid to the undertaker or to any person or municipality who or which shall have paid the claim of the undertaker.

6. Spouses Pension In the absence of an election of an option found in Section 11 on the death of an active member of the plan who was eligible at the time of death for either a superannuation retirement allowance because of meeting the superannuation retirement requirements found in Section 2 the surviving sp.ouse (or the surviving minor children in the absence of a spouse or upon remarriage of the surviving spouse) will receive a pension equal to one-half of the pension which such member would have been eligible to receive if the member had been retired at the time ofdeath.

An election by a member of an option found in Section 11 other than a Single Life Annuity prior to retirement shall make void the foregoing provision.

 26  A member who is entitled to either a superannuation retirement allowance because of meeting the superannuation retirement requirements found in Section 2 may file a written application for retirement requesting that such retirement become effective at the time of death. The member may elect one of the options provided in Section 11 and nominate a beneficiary. The application shall be held by the Board (1) until the member files a later application (PMRB-8) for a retirement allowance or (2) until the death of the member while in municipal service.

If such a member dies prior to receiving a retirement allowance benefits become effective as if the member had retired on the day immediately preceding death. The beneficiary will receive the annuity option elected before the members death.

If a member is receiving a retirement allowance in accordance with the Single Life Annuity provisions of Section 11 upon the retired members death the surviving spouse (or the surviving minor children in the absence of a spouse or upon the remarriage of the surviving spouse) will receive a pension equal to one-half of the pension which such member was receiving. If there is no surviving spouse or minor children the full amount of the total accumulated deductions standing to the members credit in the member account on the effective date of retirement minus the total amount of annuity payments received shall be paid to the designated beneficiary.

7. Length of Service Increment In addition to the basic benefit allowance those members who belong to the 8. Contributions by Members Members who belong to the classification ofGrade C shall contribute seven percent (7) of their total compensation. Said contributions shall be made in a manner consistent with Board established policy. If a member tenninates prior to becoming eligible for any benefit or the member elects not to receive a benefit that individual shall be entitled to the accumulated contributions interest and any excess investment monies allocated to the members account.

Should a former member return to the plan and restore to the System in a manner consistent with Board policy any withdrawn contributions as they existed at the time of separation all previously credited service shall be restored.

9. Military Service Any member employed by the City who has been a regularly appointed employee for at least six (6) months and is inducted into the military service of the United States shall have all of the time up to a period not to exceed five (5) years spent in such military service credited to the members employment record for pension or retirement benefits if the individual returns or has heretofore returned to employment within six. (6) months after separation from the service.

An active member may also purchase credit for other than intervening military service performed for the United States in times of war anned conflict or national emergency so proclaimed by the President of the United States for a period not to exceed five (5) years provided the member has completed five (5) years of service to the municipality subsequent to such military service. An active 27  member may file an application with the Board for permission to purchase credit for nonintervening military service upon completion of five (5) years of subsequent service to the municipality.

The amount due from the member shall be certified by the Board in accordance with methods approved by the actuary. It may be paid in a lump sum within thirty (3) days or it may be amortized with additional interest through salary deductions in amounts agreed upon by the member and the Board.

The rate of interest to be charged to a member on purchase for credit for intervening or non intervening military service shall be the rate being credited by the System to members accounts in effect on the date of the members application compounded annually.

A member may purchase credit for intervening or non-intervening military service only if discharge or separation from the service was granted under other than dishonorable conditions. A member may not purchase military credit for any service that is covered by another retirement system administered and wholly or partially paid for by any other government agency or private employer.

1 Portability When a member leaves the employ of the City and enters within one (1) year of separation into the employ of another municipality that has joined the System the members service credits shall remain unimpaired. Should a member from the employ of another municipality that has joined the System separate from service and within one (1) year of separation join the pension plan the members service credits will remain unimpaired. In such cases the municipal liability for past service shall be prorated by the System between the municipalities on an equitable basis.

11. Options on Superannuation Early Retirement or Vesting At the time a member elects to receive a retirement benefit allowance the benefit may be payable throughout the members life in which case the benefit is known as a Single Life Annuity. A member may elect to waive any entitlement to the spouses benefit found in Section 6 of this agreement by choosing at time of retirement an alternative to the Single Life Annuity that would be of an equivalent actuarial value but that would be in a lesser allowance and payable throughout life with provisions that (a) Option 1. If the member dies before receiving in payments the present value of the retirement allowance as it was at the time of retirement the balance if less than five thousand dollars ($5) shall be paid in a lump sum to the designated beneficiary ifliving or if the named beneficiary predeceased the member or if no beneficiary was named then to the members estate. If the balance is five thousand dollars ($5) or more the beneficiary may elect by application duly acknowledged and filed with the Board to receive payment of such balance according to any one of the following provisions (i) in a lump-sum payment or (ii) in an annuity having a present value equal to the balance payable or (iii) in a lump-sum payment and an annuity. Such annuity shall be of equivalent 28  actuarial value to the balance payable less the amount of the lump-sum payment specified by the beneficiary.

(b) Option 2. Upon the annuitants death the retirement allowance shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to the survivor annuitant if then living.

(c) Option 3. Upon the annuitants death one-half of the retirement allowance shall be continued throughout the life of and paid to the sUIVivor annuitant if then living.

A member who has elected a Single Life Annuity shall automatically be deemed to have elected the spouses death benefit provisions found in Section 6.

12. Social Security Offset There shall be no offset for Social Securityretirement benefits received by a member.

13. Determination of Municipal Liability The Board will actuarially determine the normal cost of the plan and any liability associated with the plans actuarial experience which shall be contributed annually by the municipality for the service credits of the members. If applicable any additional amount which shall be contributed annually toward a reserve account for the disability allowances which may be payable in accordance with this agreement shall also be determined and charged the municipality.

Because of the unique circumstances associated with the plan at the time the optional contract is being negotiated special acknowledgment is made here of the following facts ( a) At time of entry in the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System there were no active police officers employed by the City of Clairton.

(b) It is the intent of the City of Clairton to have the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement System administer the retirees and beneficiaries ofthe Police pension plan beginning October I 1991 and at that time the individual annuity transfer values will be established for the police pension liability.

(c) The City is a distressed level III city under Act 25 of 1984 and will be financing the plan liabilities in accordance with the requirements of Act 15 of 1974 and Act 25 of 1984.

The amounts so determined shall be computed in accordance with the requirements of Act 25 of 1984 the Municipal Pension Plan Fund Standard and Recovery Act and Act 15 of 1974 the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Law and subsequent amendments to either act.

17. Procedure Matters or procedure not covered in this agreement shall be as set forth in Act 15 of 1974 and as found in Act 25 of 1984 as they shall from time to time be amended.

 29  Should any charge or mistake in records result in any member beneficiary or survivor annuitant receiving from the System more or less than the individual would have been entitled to receive had the records been correct regardless of the intentional or unintentional nature of the error and upon the discovery of such error the Board will correct the error and so far as practicable adjust the payments which may be made for and to such person in such a manner that the actuarial equivalent of the benefit to which he was correctly entitled shall be paid.

18. Unfimded Liability Any unfunded liability incurred by the creation of benefits under this agreement shall be borne by the City of Clairton.

19. Effective Date This agreement shall be effective the first day of November 1991 with the acceptance of the same by the City of Clairton and the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement Board.

Tennination of this agreement shall be in accordance with Section 412 of Act 15 of 1974.

 3  Exhibit B Pension Addend um  s AOO.!ltXM irode as of this 14th day of January 1.992 by aJXi  the City of claJ.xtcn ( .refczed to AS the City and the nNNSXLVANIA M.HICIPAL  tnRD (hexeinafw efetred to as the Beam) Wlllessmfft lfEUAS on Otober 8 1991 the City and the Boaxd entered into an Aglee11e11t (hemir.a.fter xefetted to as the JqJeae.t) 1-hlch prcvides a reti.rerent pension plan for the iollce officers of the City am lmlUAS Ph 2 of the AgXeeent nquires certain CC8ilted SEUViee in order to .retixe l-iflmFAS the City and the f!C).Ud desile to mdify- Pa.ragxaph 2 of the Jlg.eeue1t t.o change the  8aXS of credited selVice.

KW  with 1he foxegoing backgrQund inonptatm here.in by reference aid nBde a part hemof the City ard the Board in oon side.raticn of the nutual pcanises a.nd obligations set foxth here.in and intesxllilg to be legally tound hen!by agree es follS the City  l. Paxagxaph 2 of the 119xee1ent dated Otober 8 1991 between  is hereby aneroed t.o  as follcr.-s  w the  2. Su1ll-annuatioo Retixerent El.i.gi.bi.lity for a SlperaMl.lation shall be dependent Upal o.hich one of the follcwjng g.zade to which the Jie-nler bela19$  Glade A - .All nerters with a rank of patrobren fitst class on Decencer 1 1975 shall be eligible fo superannuaticn upon the ccapletion of lift.eel (15) yea.rs of credit.ad service ess of age.

Grade  - All memben 1Nhose permnent date of enploynent was after Decelber 1 1977 bJt cn or lefom  24 1987 shall be eligible for sution .retiJellent upon the czrplet.icn of fifteen (lS yean of aeli.ted sexvice Md the attainment ot at lt. cge fifty (SO).

Jbtw.l.ths the age and service t ot this gnde the eligibility age for xet.irelent na3be nduced by the m.mter of l9!XS of aeditEd service awaxded as a .result of a aenber pl.tCha.sing ndllwy sezv.ice tiJlie in e with Secticn 1 of this agxee.uat.

EXHIBIT J  31  Glade C - AU   pem..nent date of arployroent -.es after NMlnber 24 1987 shall bl!li eligible for ticin i-et1.remant upcn the C1plet1on of twenty-five (25) ye.rs of cndited service and the etta.imelt of at least ege fifty-fiw (SS).

As of the dat.e of this agxeemnt all  of the previous pe.nsiat plan t.n will be enollai as nemetS of the lWZWI Ma.w.cl.pu Jethetent Systen meat one of the ebNe three Grade cla.sstias of nemler.

3.

 s Addenchn shall beoxTe ef.feotiva Januaxy 1 1992.

 4. It is the clear and unequivccal intent of the City and the lb!.rd that this Addendm shall in no manner alter or affect the ziohts or obligations of the City and tha .Boa.rd as set forth bl the t datei Octobe.l 8 1991 other than to J!Odify Pa.ragrapi 2 in the manner set forth  amve.

 m   the parties have caused this lddencbn to be exeCUtei on the day and year f.ixsc alove written.

 11  CIAllm.N ClTi.

  alll.M  I I Secretaq SW.J    PVANIA MUNICIPAL REIIRElmll  SYr -----------  Secte Approve! as to om and le.allty.

 By----------..

Oftice o! Aznev  By  General  Chief ColJnsel for offfce ofGCeralColnsel  Jpkl   In oi  32  lmRO  Exhibit C  CITY OF CLAIRTON DRUG  ALCOHOL TESTING PROGRAM  It is the goal ofthe City of Clairton to provide a safe workplace by eliminating the potential hazards to health and job safety created by drug and alcohol abuse. The City has no intention of intruding into the private lives of its employees. However we realize that involvement with drugs and  or alcohol off the job eventually takes its toll on job performance. Our concern is to assure that employees report to work in a condition so as to be able to perform their duties safely and efficiently in the interest of their fellow workers the community as a whole and themselves.

 PROHIBITED CONDUCT Any employee found to be unlawfully using manufacturing selling distributing dispensing possessing purchasing trafficking in or under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or drug while performing assigned duties for the City of Clairton will be considered to be in violation of this policy. The City cannot condone and will not tolerate any of the following behavior by its employees.

1. Use of illicit drugs 2. Abuse oflegal (prescription or over-the-counter) drugs 3. Abuse of alcohol 4. Sale purchase transfer use or possession of illegal drugs or prescription drugs obtained legally 5. Arrival for work under the influence of legal drugs or alcohol to the extent that job performance is affected.

 CITY RESPONSIBILITY - The City of Clairton will 1. Create an awareness in employee of the impact and dangers of drug  alcohol abuse.

2. Administer programs that consider employee rights that are positive in their intent and are within legal boundaries.

3. Support the establishment ofprograms to assist employees with drug and or alcohol abuse or dependency.

 EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBILITY responsibility to  The City believes that each employee has the  I . Report to work free of alcohol and other drug and their effects.

2. Participate and support City sponsored drug and alcohol education programs.

 33  3. Voluntarily seek and accept assistance for alcohol and other drug abuse related problems before job performance is affected through City sponsored Employee Assistance Program (EAP) 4. Support City efforts to eliminate drug and alcohol abuse in order to maintain a safe drug  alcohol free workplace.

 POLICY VIOLATION Employees violating this policy will be subject to appropriate disciplinary action up to and including termination. Employees may be suspended with or without pay pending completion of an investigation. The City reserves the right to search employees personal effects brought onto City property along with the employees work area when an employee is reasonably suspected of being involved in alcohol drug or controlled substance abuse activities. Employees must notify the City Manager of any criminal drug statute conviction within five (5) calendar days after the conviction.

City Manager must report and drug statute conviction to the Mayor.

In the case of abuse of drugs or alcohol the City will use constructive disciplinary measures to motivate the employee to seek assistance and will direct said employee to appropriate resources available in the community. Normal City benefits available to any employee such as sick leave and the group medical plan are available to aid in the rehabilitation process. If the available assistance prograrn(s) fail assistance is inappropriate given the nature of the infraction for example sale or distribution to other employees or the general public while on City time or the employees position is one that requires a zero tolerance of substance abuse the penalty for substance abuse may be termination of employment.

 SCOPE AND COMPLIANCE 1. Job applicants will be subject to a pre-employment drug and alcohol test prior to being hired.

Applicants who refuse or fail a pre-employment drug  alcohol test will be withdrawn from consideration for employment.

2. Any current employee of the City will be required to submit to random post-accident and post-rehabilitation (workers compensation) drug testing.

3. All actions taken in accordance with this program as a result of a failed drug test will be applied consistently among all employees.

 DEFINITIONS ACCIDENT - is an occurrence involving a fatality or personal injury to any employee requiring medical treatment or property loss in excess of$5 including any event that the City determines to be significant.

 34  INCIDENT- has all the attributes of an accident and can best be described as a near miss but no damage and or personal injury occurred. Supervisory discretion will determine the need for a drug and alcohol test.

FAIL A DRUG OR ALCOHOL TEST- means that a confirmed drug test or alcohol test result shows positive evidence of the presence of a prohibited drug in a persons system in excess of the minimum initial and confirmatory test levels set forth on the table attached hereto as Exhibit A.

An employee will also be deemed to have failed a drug or alcohol test if heshe refuse to submit to any of the required tests set forth in this program.

PROHIBITED DRUG - is any of the following substances including but not limited to amphetamines barbiturates benzodiazepines cocaine marijuana methaqualone opiates phencyclidine (PCP) and alcohol.

 REQUIRED TESTING Pre-employment -All job applicants will be screened for drug and alcohol use as part of the pre  employment process. Applicants who fail the pre-employment drug test shall forfeit any further consideration for employment and cannot have their sample re-tested.

Post-Accident  1. Following an accident any employee whose performance either contributed to or cannot be completely discounted as a contributor to the accident will be tested for prohibited drug use as soon as possible but no later than eight (8) hours after the accident. Because certain drugs or drug metabolites do not remain in the body for extended periods of time testing should be as soon as possible. If an employee to be tested is injured unconscious or otherwise unable to give consent to the drug all reasonable steps must be taken to obtain required specimens for the testing. If an employee is unconscious or otherwise unable to evidence consent to the procedure the medical facility shall collect the sample.

If an employee who is subject to post-accident testing is conscious able to urinate normally in the opinion of the medial professional and refuses to be tested that employee will be removed from duty as an employee by this policy and subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination.

2. Post-accident testing for alcohol shall be conducted using acceptable blood or breathalyzer test procedures as determined by the contracted service. A positive test for the presence of alcohol will require evidence of at least .3 blood alcohol level content. Anyone with a CDL license .2 blood alcohol level.

3. Any employee who finds it necessary to file a workers compensation claim will be required to submit to a drug and an alcohol test as soon as possible but no later than eight (8) hours of the reported occurrence or injury.

35  Random  1. All employees covered by this policy are subject to unannounced testing based on random selection. This includes all full-ti.me part-time seasonal and temporary employees.

2. The employees to be tested will be selected by a computer-based random number generator that matches with a City issued employee number. The random drug and alcohol testing will be reasonably spread throughout a twelve-month period.

3. To assure that the selection process is random all employees will be placed in a common pool.

4. The selection procedure will select sufficient additional nwnbers (names to be used to reach the appropriate testing level during each test period. Alternative numbers (names) will be selected and tested in order of selection only if the persons initially selected are unavailable for testing due to vacation medical or scheduling.

5. Random selection of employees to be tested will be done by a contracted service.

 METHODS AND PROCEDURES Medical Drug Testing Inc. a contracted representative of the City will administer the drug and alcohol testing program prepare collection sitc(s) collect specimens prepare required forms submit the specimens to a Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) certified laboratory have results evaluated by a qualified Medical Review Officer (MRO) and prepare maintain and submit all required reports relative to the Plan on the Citys behalf. Medical Drug Testing Inc.s offices are located at St. Clair Occupational Medicine Center 2 Oxford Drive Suite 1 Bethel Park Pa. 1512  DRUG  ALCOHOL TESTING PROCEDURE 1. Drug testing will be performed utilizing urine samples. Tests for prohibited drugs anq alcohol will be performed. Test levels are specified in ExhibitA. Upon notification by the appropriate City supervisor employees will be instructed to report to a designated collection site for delivery of a urine sample. When an employee is not present on the day heshe is selected for random testing the specimen collection may be perfonned at the first available opportunity after the employee returns to work if such selection is kept confidential.

 36  2. An applicant for employment for a position with the City will be required to report to the collection site within 24 hours of notification and provide a specimen of bisher urine for testing.

3. Upon notification that a drug test is required. An employee will report as soon as possible but no later than 24 hours after notification to the collection site and provide a urine specimen.

4. Upon reporting to the designated collection site the employee will be required to complete a consent to testing form which will be provided.

5. The collection technician will instruct employees on the proper method of collecting the specimen and every effort will be made to insure privacy. Privacy will be forfeited however if the collection technician with the concurrence of a City representative has reason to believe that an employee might alter or substitute hisher specimen. If specimen alteration or substitution is suspected a second sample will be obtained. under the direct observation of a trained collection technician of the same gender as the employee being tested.

6. The collection technician will properly identify all specimens in strict accordance with the applicable procedures as set forth in the regulations and will follow protocol to insure the proper chain of custody for every specimen. The collection agency shall adhere to all requirements outlined in 49 CFR Part 4 Procedures for Transportation Workplace Drug Testing Program.

7. After delivering a specimen to the collection technician the employee will return to hisher  assigned res ponsibilities unless otherwise instructed.

 8. Alcohol testing shall be conducted by a trained collection technician by means of blood samples or breathalyzer tests or both. Blood samples will be drawn by trained technicians and then identified handled to assure proper chain of custody and delivered to a certified test laboratory in the same manner as described elsewhere in this plan with respect to specimens taken for the pmpose of testing for prohibited drugs. Breathalyzer tests administered under this program shall only utilize instruments which have been listed by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration on the Conforming Products List of Evidential Breath Measurement Devices as amended and calibrated in strict compliance with the procedures set forth in the manufactures specifications. Furthermore breathalyzer tests shall be administered only by qualified operators certified to administer such test.

9. If an employee is required to report to a site off-site of City Hall or outside of the City of Clairton limits it will be done during the work day hours and the City will provide transportation.

 37  REPORTING OF RESULTS 1. Reporting - all test results will be strictly confidential and will be reported to the City of Clairtons drug plan coordinator only. In the absence or unavailability of the drug plan coordinator test results will be reported to the then designated altemative  representative.

A. Toe DHHS certified test laboratory will send all test results directly to the MRO (Medical  Review Officer) a qualified medical doctor.

B. The MRO will discuss positive (failed) test results directly with the affected employee.

Negative test results are not discussed. If after five (5) days the MRO has documented an inability to reach an employee via telephone the City representative will contact the employee and arrange for a private place for the employee to discuss the test results with theMRO.

2. Positive Test Results A. All positive (failed) drug test results will be confirmed by the MRO using the Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (GCMS) method.

 B. If a breathalyzer test for alcohol results is positive (failed) test a second breathalyzer test shall n administered within thirty (3) minutes after the completion of the initial test. If the second breathalyzer test also result in a positive (failed) test the tested employee will be given a prompt opportunity to provide a blood sample for analysis in accordance with the provisions of this plan. If after a second positive (failed) breathalyzer test result the tested employee fails to take the prompt opportwlity to provide a blood sample for analysis the positive (fail) test results determined by the initial and confinnatory breathalyzer tests shall stand and be considered as a conformed positive (failed) test result.

C. The MRO will review and interpret each con finned positive drug test result to detennine if there is an alternative medical explanation for the result by 1. Interviewing the employee 2. Reyjewing the employees medical records (to be provided by the employee) to determine whether or not a positive test was caused by legally prescribed medication 3. Verifying the accuracy of the laboratory 4. Requiring reanalysis of the original specimen. If deemed necessary to determine the accuracy of the result reported.

 38  MEDICAL REVIEW OFFICER (MRO) 1. MRO Specific Responsibilities  A.

B.

C.

D.

E.

F.

G.

H.

I.

J.

K.

L.

M.

N.

.

P.

Q.

 Receive positive confirmed results from laboratory Request if needed a quantitative description of test results Receive a certified copy of the original chain of custody Review and interpret positive test results Inform the tested individual and provide test results Conduct a medical interview with the tested individual Review the individuals medical history or any other relevant biomedical factors Give the individual an opportunity to discuss test results Order a reanalysis of the original sample in a certified laboratory if necessary Consult with others if questions of accuracy arise Consult with laboratory officials Not receive urinalysis results that do not comply with the mandatory guidelines ofNIDA certified laboratories Not declare as positive an opiate-positive urine without clinical evidence Determine whether a result is scientifically sufficient Detennine whether and when an employee who refused to take or did not pass a drug test administered under specified procedures may return to duty Determine whether a result is consistent with legal drug use Forward results of a verified positive test to the drug program coordinator  2. MRO General Responsibilities A. If the MRO determines that there is a legitimate medical explanation for a positive test result no further action will be required and the test results will be treated as a negative.

B. If the Iv1RO determines that there is not a legitimate medical explanation for a positive result other than unauthorized use ofa prohibited drug or alcohol the MR.O will issue a statement to the employee and the City.

 COLLECTION SITES The Collection sites for this policy are to be decided by the City in coordination with and approved by  RETENTION OF SPECIMENS AND RETESTING I. All urine and blood specimens yielding confirmed positive test results will be retained by the certified DHHS testing laboratory in properly secured long term frozen storage for 365 days 39  (the Storage Period). During the Storage Period the City the employee (with respect to that employees own test specimen) or an authorized representative of the employee (with respect to that employees own test specimen) may request in writing that the laboratory retain the specimen for an additional period. Unless the laboratory receives a proper written request to retain a specimen beyond its Storage Period all specimens will be discarded at the end of their respective Storage Period.

2. An employee may request in writing that any urine specimen which has been confirmed positive be retested by another DHHS certified laboratory. Any such request for retesting must be made within 72 hours after the employees receipt of a final test result from the MRO. Medical Testing Inc. will supply standard request for use in these circumstances. The requesting employee must pay the City in advance for the cost of specimen shipment and approved chain of custody procedures in transferring a portion of the specimen to the second designated certified DllliS laboratory that will perform the specimen retest. The advance fee for this retesting is $1 payable to the City or withheld from payroll upon written authorization. The employee will be reimbursed by the City for the retesting expenses incurred only if the retest ultimate results are negative.

 RELEASE OF RECORDS I. Records of an employees test results or completion of rehabilitation treatment shall be released to a party other than the City of Clairton only upon the written consent of the affected employee. However such records may be released to a representative or the administrator of a federal or state agency if so requested as part of an accident investigation.

2. Statistical data (not name specific) related to drug testing or training may be released to a representative of a federal or state agency upon request  CONFIDENTIALITY 1. Each individuals record of testing and results under this policy will be maintained in a private and confidential manner. With the exception of the drug program staff (test laboratory MRO and drug program coordinator) or upon request of federal or state agency officials as part of an accident investigation the results of individual drug test will not be released to anyone outside the City of Clairton without the expressed written authorization of the individual tested. Prior to testing the individual will be informed about who will receive the test data.

2. All written records will be stored in locked containers or in a secure location with access only available by authorized personnel (testing laboratory MR.O drug program coordinator and City of Clairton representative).

3. Unless an employee gives hisher written consent the employees drug testing andor rehabilitation records will not be released to a subsequent employer.

4  EMPLOYEE IDENTIFICATION 1. Education Every employee covered by this policy will receive the following drug and alcohol abuse prevention education A. Drug information will be periodically distributed and displayed in the work areas.

B. A copy ofthis policy will be available to each employee and displayed in the work areas.

C. Contact information for the Employee Assistance Program (EAP) will be made available to all employees and displayed in work areas.

2. Rehabilitation A. Employees testing positive for drugs or alcohol will be placed on unpaid suspension for  ten (1) days within which time heshe shall be evaluated by a Substance Abuse Professional (SAP. The determination of this evaluation will result in the required rehabilitation necessary to return to work for the City. Upon written documentation of the employees completion of the rehabilitation program from the SAP the employee will be considered for employment with the City of Clairton and be subject to unannounced follow-up testing as determined by the SAP. This follow-up testing as determined by the SAP can be activated for up to sixty (6) months following the employees return to work In no case will follow-up testing be less than six (6) unannounced testings during the first year of re-employment.

B. This rehabilitation benefit will be an option available to City ofClairton employees one time and one time only. If after failing a drug or alcohol test an employee refuses to enter an approved drug or alcohol rehabilitation program fails to comply with or complete the requirements of the rehabilitation program fails any post-rehabilitation drug or alcohol test or other subsequent follow-up drug or alcohol tests or fails to comply with any aspect of the City of Clairton anti-drug and alcohol program the employee will be discharged. Furthermore the drug and alcohol rehabilitation option described above will be offered only as long as the employees rehabilitation treatment as part of its health benefits package. The City of Clairton will not be responsible for any rehabilitation expenses. All cost for rehabilitation and follow-up testing are to be borne by the employee. Employee will be required to sign a Last Chance Agreement which will spell out the requirements outlined in A above and this section B. Failure to sign the Last Chance Agreement will result in immediate tennination of employment with the City of Clairton.

 41  C. Employees testing positive for drugs andor alcohol following an accident will be given no second chance as outlined in B above. The employee will be discharged immediately from the City  42  Exhibit D  PROGRESSIVE DISCIPLINE POLICY PROCESS CLASS ONE VIOLATIONS  First Violation - Verbal Warning (Written notice in file) Second Violation - Written Warning Third Violation - One (1) day suspension without pay Fourth Violation -Three (3) day suspension without pay Fifth Violation - Five (5) day suspension without pay Sixth Violation - Termination of employment Any employee who works twelve (12) months since the last violation of any rule in the Class One Violations shall have all previous violations in Class One disregarded for the purpose ofprogressive discipline. The twelve (12) month period beginnings with the first violation. It is not based on a calendar year.

Class One Violations including but are not limited to -  Engaging in personal task while on City time Gambling Disorderly Conduct including the following .

 Being argumentative  Making derogatory andor slanderous accusations against another employee or supervisor Use of profanity as well as coerciveabusive language towards another employee supervisor or non-City employee (resident business owner etc.) Disruptive emotional outburst and meltdowns Revealing City infonnation andor records to unauthorized persons Loafing during work hours and while on City time Perfonningjob functions in a negligent or careless way Failure to report an accident or injury to the supervisor Leaving the work area andor City premises without notifying a supervisor andor without permission Failure to return to work from an authorized leave or break Failing to comply with established safety regulations and procedures Violating established fire safety health or security regulations or creating a hazardous situation for yourself others andor City property Failing to abide by City uniform dress or safety standards Failing to notify a supervisor before starting time ifthe employee is unable to report for work.

 Excessive absenteeism andor tardiness  Failure to notify the City of a planned absence 43  Posting distributing or circulating unauthorized notices posters billboards etc. on City property or within the City limits Failure to punch your time card as per policy Unnecessarily wasting City materials supplies etc.

 CLASS TWO VIOLATIONS Cause for immediate termination Class Two Violations including but are not limited to -  -  Being the aggressor in a fight Being under the influence of alcohol andor any other intoxicating substance or nonprescription narcotic drugs or bringing the same onto City property Causing deliberate or careless damage to City property Intentional falsification or altering of records reports or timesbeets Sleeping while on City time Theft of City property Unauthorized or improper use andor care of City property Punching signing or recording time of another employee Making unfound claims of and occupational injury illness or disability Offering or taking a bribe of any kind in connection with City work or business Giving false information in making an application for work Failure to perform a necessary service connected with the efficient operation of the City as required by a supervisor or refusal to obey a reasonable order or directive given by a  supervisor  Unauthorized commitment of City resources personnel property or services without the approval of the City Manage  44  
