)-------  - . --  -----------  period however this shall not be used as a subterfuge for the purpose of depriving regular employees of their work.

 ARTICLENO. 5 - HOURSOF WORK A. All full-time Police Officers shall work a forty (4) hour week consisting of five (5) eight (8) hour   The workweek shall be the period beginning at 121 a.m. Sunday until 12 midnight on the Saturday following. No employee shall be required to work more than five (5) consecutive days in any one week unless overtime is paid for any day beyond five (5).

 B. The normal hours of work shall be forty (4) hours per week. The daily hours of work shall be a consecutive eight (8) hours except for such rest or lunch period as may be provided in accordance with practices now prevailing.

 C. Employees shall be paid at one and one-half (l-12) times the regular rate of pay for hours worked in excess of forty (4) straight time hours per week. Time and one-half (1-li2) shall be paid for each hour worked in excess of eight (8) hours in any one day. However overtime shall not be pyramided.

I.

 If an employee works in excess of eight (8) hours (double shift) in any one (I) day at the employees request or to accommodate the scheduling request of the employee such employee shall not be entitled to overtime for said hours.

 D. An employee who is ca11ec1 out for work shall be provided with a minimum of four (4) hours work or ifno work is available he shall be credited with a four (4) hour reporting allowance at the regular wage rate. Call out as herein used shall be defined as the un-canceled direction to report for work and the actual reporting at work in response to said direction.

E. Overtime pay shall be paid on the regular payday for the period in which the overtime is worked.

 F. Daily or weekly work schedules shall be detennined by the Borough and may be changed from time to time to meet the needs of the Borough and public protection provided that the Officers affected shall be given at least forty-eight (48) hours notice prior to any change in shift or schedule.

Emergencies and public disaster situations are exceptions from this situation.

l.

 The schedule shall be posted a minimum of two (2) weeks in advance. Officers shall submit their availably by the fifth of the preceding month. Officers who fail to provide their availably by this deadline will not be scheduled for the following month. Officers who fail to provide their availability more than once in a twelve month period shall be subject to disciplinary action.

 G. Any overtime  or extra shifts. shall be done according to seniority  on a round robin basis.

 H. No officer shall be removed from the schedule once the schedule has been made and posted.

1. Shifts shall be defined as follows 1st shift - 12 a.m. start 2nd shift - 8 a.m. start 2  3rd shift - 4 p.m. start J. Knocked-out shifts starts shall be determined by the Borough and Shift Differentials shall be paid  accordingto ArticleNo. 6 - Ratesof Pay.

K. Employees have the option to receive compensatorytime in lieu of overtimepay. Officersmay accumulate up to forty ( 4) hours of compensatory time each year which if not used will be sold back at the end of each year.

ARTICLE NO. 6 - RA TES OF PAY 1-1-218  1-1-219  1-1-22  1-1-221  1-1-222  I  I !  $18.61  $18.61  $18.61  $18.91  $19.21  PATROLMAN  $17.86  $17.86  $17.86  $18.16  SI 8.46  PART-TIME SERGEANT  $17.39  $17.69  $17.99  $18.29  $18.59  PART-TIME DETECTIVE  $17.38  $17.68  $17.98  $18.28  $18.58  PART-TIME PATROLMAN  $17.13  $17.43  $17.73  $18.3  $18.33  !SERGEANT  --.

 Officer in Charge (OIC) shall be paid one dollar ($1.) per hour over and above the current rate of pay.

 If any additional categories are added the parties shall meet to negotiate the rates of pay.

Shift differentials for the term of this Agreement shall be defined as follows $.35 per hour I st shift $25 per hour 3rd shift   Shift differentials shall be paid for actual hours worked.

ARTICLE NO. 7 - HOLIDAYS A. The following sixteen (16) days shall be considered holidays New Years Day Good Friday  Memorial Day July 4th Labor  New Years Eve  Day  Veterans  Thanksgiving Day Day after Thanksgiving Christmas Eve Christmas Day  Day  Five (5) Personal Days  B. All full-time and part-time officers are entitled to five (S) personal days per year. The personal days shall be non-cumulative and shall be requested in writing forty-eight (48) hours prior to intended use. Any schedule changes necessitated by virtue of the use of personal days shall not 3  I  ! !  constitute contract violations or warrant overtime pay. The employee shall receive eight (8) hours pay at his regular wage rate as holiday pay. This shall be paid as an un-worked holiday.

 C. Any full-timeor part-timeofficer who is scheduledto work on any of the Holidaysset forth in  Section Alshallbecomrensated attherateofoneandone-half (1-12)timeshisregularrateofpay  plus holidaypay at straignt time or a tOial or two ano one-half (Z ltZ) times his regular hourly  niLc  for all holiday hours worked. Part-time Officers shall not be paid for the Holiday unless they work the holiday (emergency call outs are the same as being scheduled).

D. For the purpose of determining whether an employee has worked five 5) days in this regularly scheduled work week holiday shall be considered as days worked whether worked or not and regardless of whether they are scheduled as days of work or of rest. A full-time employee who is scheduled vacation during a holiday week shall be paid vacation pay in addition to holiday pay as defined in Article 7 Section B.

 ARTICLENO. 8 - UNIFORMALLOWANCE A. The Borough shall pay each full-time officer a uniform allowance of six hundred dollars ($6.) per year of the agreement for all items including leather.

 B. Part-timeofficers who work more than four hundred (4) hours the previous year shall receive a uniform allowance of five hundred dollars ($5.) per year. Part-time officers who work more than two hundred (2) hours the previous year shall receive a uniform allowance of three hundred dollars ($3.) per year.

Part-time officers who have worked for the Borough for five (5) consecutive years will receive a minimum uniform allowance of three hundred dollars ($3.) per year.

 C. All uniform allowances shall be paid by check to all full-time and part-time officers on or before April 1st of each year.

ARTICLE NO. 9 - JURY DUTY LEAVES Whenever an employee is required to be on Jury Duty he shall receive on a daily basis the difference between his compensation as a juror and what he would have received had he been on the job. The purpose of this Article is to enable the employee to meet civic responsibility without suffering a monetary loss.

 ARTICLENO. 1 - MILITARYSERVICE Employees who enter the Anned Services of the United States or who have left or who subsequentto the date hereof eave their position for the purpose of being inducted into enlisting in determining their physical fitness to enter or to perform training duty in said Armed Forces shall be reinstated in accordance with the applicable Federal Statutes.

ARTICLE NO. 11 - SENIORITY A. Layoffs recalls after layoffs vacations work schedules shall be in accordance with seniority providing the employee bas the ability to perform the work.

4  Step Three If the grievance is not satisfactorily resolved at Step Two the Union may appeal to arbitration within ten ( 1) days after a decision at Step Two is rendered. A request for arbitration may be initiated by the Union serving upon the Borough Council or its designee a notice in writing of intent to proceed to arbitration. The notice shall identify the agreement provisions in dispute the issue(s) to be determined and the employee or employees involved.

Upon receipt of a notice requesting arbitration the parties shall meet to select an Arbitrator if the parties cannot voluntarily agree upon the selection of an Arbitrator they shall notify the State Bureau of Mediation of their inability to do so. The State Bureau of Mediation shall then submit to the parties the names of seven (7) Arbitrators. Each party shall alternately strike a name until one ( 1) remains. The Borough shall strike the first name. The person remaining shall be the Arbitrator.

If either party requests that a dispute be submitted to arbitration the parties shall first attempt to mutually agree upon an impartial arbitrator. If the parties are unable to so mutually agree within five (5) days after request for arbitration is received then the Employer and the Union shall request the Bureau of Mediation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to submit the names of seven (7) suggested arbitrators. Each party shall alternately strike a name until one name remains. The Employer shall strike the first name. The person remaining shall be the Arbitrator.

The cost of arbitration including the expense of the arbitrator the hearing room and the transcript of the testimony of the hearing transcnoed shall be shared equally by the parties.

Fees paid to the arbitrator shall be based on a schedule established by the Bureau of Mediation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

 The decisions of the arbitrator shall be final andbinding upon the case being heard.

Saturdays and Sundays and designated holidays shall not be included in the time limits set forth in this Article.

 ARTICLE NO 13. - SICK LEA VE A. Full-time Officers shall earn one and one-fourth (1-14) days of sick leave entitlement for each month worked during the current calendar year and may accumulate unused sick leave days up to a maximum of two hundred (2) days.

 B. Proof of illness in the fonn of a medical certificate shall be required if an employee is absent for more than three (3) consecutive days.

C. Upon retirement employees shall be reimbursed at the rate of fifty percent (5) of the officers base rate of pay per day for all accumulated unused sick days up to a maximum of two hundred (2) days.

D. At the end of each calendar year the Borough will buy-back each unused accumulated sick day up to a maximum of two hundred (2) days at the rate of fifty percent (5) of the officers base rate of pay per day. All of which the employee will receive in his or her paycheck no later than the 3 I st of January of the contract year just completed. Should an employee quit prior to December 31st of 6  .--.

 any current year all unused sick days shall be bought back at the rate of $7. per day for each day payable not later than the 31st of January the following year.

E. Part time officers who have worked eight hundred (8) hours for the Borough the prior year will earn two (2) sick days the following year and may accumulate unused sick leave days up to a maximum of two hundred (2) days. In the event an officer does not work eight hundred (8) hours in any calendar year the officer will not be entitled to any sick days the following year.

 ARTICLENO. 14 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE In the event of a death in the immediate family of a police officer he may have the time off with pay not to exceed three (3) calendar days from the time of death until burial. Immediate family is defined as being a members spouse children mother father grandparents brother sister current father-in-law current mother-in-law and legal guardian. It is understood that this provision is intended to guarantee income and to prevent a loss of income thus the only days for which pay will be given will be days the Officer would have been regularly schedule(fto work .

In the event of a death of a full-time officers immediate family member he may have the time off with pay not to exceed five (5) calendar days from the time of death until burial. If the five (5) days fall over a weekend or the officers pass days those days shall be included as bereavement ARTICLE NO. 15 - DUES AND SERVICE CHARGE CHECK-OFF A. The Employer agrees to deduct monthly union dues of the Union from the first pay each month of any employee from whom written authorization is received and to send such dues to the SecretaryTreasurer of the Union on or before the end of the month for which the deduction is made.

B. A dues check.off authorization is to be voluntary but once given it may not be revoked except during the period fifteen (15) days prior to the expiration of this Agreement.

 C. All employees who do not become Union members shall as a condition of employment pay to the Union each month a service charge an amount equal to the regular monthly dues and assessments of the Union as a contribution toward administration of this Agreement.

The Employer agrees to deduct the service charge from the first pay each month of said Employee and forward it to the Unions Secretary-Treasurer on or before the end of the month for which the deduction is made.

When a full-time or part-time member of the collective bargaining unit declines to join the union he shall nevertheless be assessed a fair share fee as defined in the Public Employee Fair Share Fee Law 43 P.S. Sec. 112.1 et seg. The Union shall determine the fee in accordance with and follow a11 procedures  establisbed  by the Public  .Employee  Fair Snare Fee Law 43 P.S. Sec. 112.l.

 et  seg . monthly dues and fair share fees shall be owed by part-time officers only for those months in which they work at least thirty-two (32) hours.

The Union agrees to limit the fees to eighty percent (8) of the regular monthly dues.

 7  The Employer agrees to deduct the aforesaid fair share fee from the first pay each month of said employee and forward it to the Unions Secretary-Treasurer on or before the end of the month for which the deduction is made.

 D. The Union agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the Employer from any and all claims suits or other forms of liability which may arise as a result of the Employer making deductions required under Article No. 15.

 ARTICLE NO.16-VACATIONS A. Eligibility A full-time employee shall be eligible for a vacation in any calendar year during the term of this Agreement if  1.

 He has completed at least one I) year of continuous service on or before December 31 of the preceding year or if  2.

 He completes his year of continuous service during the calendar year.

 B. Length of Vacation An eligiole employee who prior to or during one calendar year completes the years of continuous service indicated in the following table shall receive a vacation corresponding to such years of continuous service.

 YEARS OF SERVICE  VACATIONS  l year of service  1 week  2 years of service  2 weeks  5 years of service 1 years of service 15 or more years of service  3 weeks 4 weeks  5 weeks  1.

 Each week of vacation shall be seven (7) consecutive days provided however the employee will be paid for five 5) days at the regular wage rate and no pay for the remaining two (2) days.

 2.

 Vacations shall be non-accumulative.

 3.

 Employees shall be required to take time off for their vacation. Once vacations are scheduled and approved they may not be changed without approval of the Mayor. If an employee having started vacation is called back he will be paid at double time for the period of his vacation he is required to work.

 4.

 Scheduling  of vacations  shall be in the exclusive  control and discretion  of the Borough.

 However each Officer shall be afforded the opportunity or right of selection of vacation on a seniority basis with the senior Officer posting his requested time first and so on in line of seniority. A tentative schedule shall be posted on or before January 15 of each year with each employee making his selection in accordance with his seniority. The selected periods are all subject to the approval by the Borough to insure prudent management of the work force and the public safety. No more than two (2) officers 8  shall be permitted to be on vacation at any one time except at the discretion of the Mayor. The final vacation schedule shall be posted on or before March 1 in each year.

 5.

 All officers covered under this Agreement shall pick the first two (2) weeks of their vacation. No one is to pick additional weeks until this is done. After this has been done those entitled to additional weeks shall do so in accordance with the above example.

 ARTICLE NO. 17 - SUSPENSIONAND DISCHARGE A. The employer retains the right to suspend and discharge any employee. In all cases involving discharge or suspension of an employee the employer must notify the employee in writing of his pischarge or suspension and the reason therefore. Such notice shall also be given to the Shop Steward and a copy mailed to the Union Office within forty-eight (48) hours from the time of discharge or suspension.

 B. A suspended employee who believes he was not suspended for just cause must notify the Employer in writing within five (5) working days after receiving notification of such action against him of his desire to appeal suspension. In such event such grievance shall then be handled in accordance with the grievance procedure set forth in this Agreement starting with Step 2. If such a notice and complaint is not given the matter shall be deemed closed.

 ARTICLE NO. 18 - STEWARDS A. The employer recognizes the right of the Union to designate Job Stewards and alternates. The authority of Job Stewards and alternates so designated by the Union shall be limited to and shall not exceed the following duties and activities The investigation and presentation of grievances in accordance with the provisions of the Collective Bargaining Agreement.

The transmission of such messages and information which shall originate with and are authorized by the Local Union or its Officers provided such messages and information I.

 have been reduced to writing or  2.

 if not reduce to writing are of a routine nature and do not involve work stoppages slowdowns refusal to handle goods or any other interference with the employers business.

 B. Job Stewards and alternates have no authority to take strike action or any other action interrupting the Employers business.

C. The Employer recognizes these limitations upon the authority of the Job Stewards and their alternates  and shall not hold the Union liable for any unauthorized  acts.

 The employer  in so  recognizing such limitations shall have the authority to impose proper discipline including discharge in the event the Job Steward has taken an unauthorized strike action slowdown or work stoppage in violation of this Agreement.

 9  D. Stewards shall be permitted to investigate present and process grievances on or off the property of the Employer. Such investigations presentations and processing shall take place during the Stewards and employees non-working time except that the Steward may have a maximum of one (I) hour during working hours to participate in a second step Grievance Meeting at which the Unions full-time Officer is present. Such one (1) hour shall be considered working hours in computing daily andor weekly overtime.

 ARTICLE N.19-  HOSPITALIZATION AND LIFE INSURANCE  A. All full-time officers and their dependents shall be enrolled in the Keystone Blue H.M.O.as soon as possible. Said medical plan shall be administered through the Employer-Teamsters Local 25 Welfare Fund. Said plan shall cover children up to age 26 and mentally handicapped children regardless of age. Total cost to be paid by the Employer.

 B. All full-time officers shall be covered by the following Life Insurance Plans effective their first day of employment.

Welfare Fund.

 Said insurance shall be administered by the Employer-Teamsters Local 25  Life Insurance  1.

 A.D.D.

 $25 $5  Paid-upLife Insurance at retirement  $ 5  All part-time officers shall have the option to be covered with a $25 Life and a $5 Accidental Death and Dismemberment Policy. The cost of this Policy shall be shared equally between the Borough and the part-time officer that chooses to accept this policy.

 C. False arrest insurance shall be provided no less than $1..

D. The Borough shall provide Dental and Eye Care Coverage for all full-time employees and hisher dependents. Total cost of prerniwn to be paid for by the Employer. Said Dental and Eye Care Plan shall be the Employer-Teamsters Local 25 Welfare Fund.

 E. The Borough shall provide health and accident insurance for each full-time employee up to an amount of fifty percent (5) per week for one (1) year payment to start the thirteenth (13th) day in the event of an accident or illness.

F. Election of Primary Health Care Coverage - Each employee aged 65 through 69 must be offered the opportunity to elect in writing the coverage under any group health plan offered by its employer.

Every Employer must communicate to each eligible employee in writing prior to the time of election in specific terms and conditions of all available health insurance plans. Every Employer must notify each eligible employee that if the Employers plan(s) is primary for those services covered by Medicare the Employer plan is primary for those services covered by Medicare pays secondary benefits. Every Employer must inform all eligible employees of the consequences of choosing any Employer health plan and the extent to which benefits available under an Employer plan can be anticipated to be supplemented by Medicare Coverage. Similarly eligible employees must be informed of the consequences of not choosing an employer plan(s). Every employer must also inform eligible employees that if the Employers plan(s) cover only non-Medicare covered items and services such as dental care and prescription drugs the employer plan is liable for those 1  .

 non-Medicare covered items and services and Medicare is liable for Medicare - covered items and services such as hospitalization. Every Employer should attempt to inform each eligible employee of the need to apply for Medicare coverage. Where the Employer previously paid or contributed towardthe MedicarePart B premiumpaymentthe Employermust notify each eligible employeeif and under what circumstancesit intends to discontinueMedicare Part B contributions. Such a notice should specificallyinform each eligible employee of the penalty resulting from a lapse in Medicare Part B coverage 1625.2  48 Fed. Register. 26438 (June 7 1983.

G. Team Legal The Borough shall provide and pay the full cost for all employees for Criminal and Civil Legal Defense Insurance through Teamsters Local Union No. 25. The cost of the coverage is currently $86.88 per officer on an annual basis. The cost of said coverage shall not exceed $1. annually per officer for the term of the AgreemenL H. Should the employer be able to acquire Medical coverage Insurance equal to that of the Teamsters Keystone Blue H.M.O. Plan at a lesser premium they will be required to give 6 days advanced written notice of such intent to the Union. During the 6 days the Union shall have the right the review the new plan. Should the Union contend the new plan is not equal the matter shall be submitted to Arbitration under Article 12. During the dispute period the Employer will continue the current coverage.

 I. The Borough agrees to permit the employees to purchase a Supplemental Insurance Programcost to be paid by the employees. The Borough does not agree to payroll deductions for the cost of said coverage.

 ARTICLE NO. 2- HEALTH AND SAFETY EQUIPMENT The Borough shall continue to make reasonable provisions for the safety and health of its employees during the hours of their employment. Protective devices and other equipment necessary to properly protect employees shall be provided by the Borough in accordance with the practice now prevailing in order to insure safety which the Union agrees to enforce.

 ARTICLE NO. 21 - SUBCONTRACTING For the purpose of preserving work and job opportunities for the employees covered by this Agreement the Employer agrees that no work or services of the kind nature or type covered by presently perfonned by or hereafter assigned to the Collective Bargaining Unit shall be subcontracted transferred leased assigned or conveyed in whole or in part to any other municipality or agency that may cause the laying off or removal of any of the bargaining unit members covered by this Agreement.

Nor shall any agency or municipality take any work away from bargaining unit members covered by this Agreement.

ARTICLE  NO 22 - MISCELLANEOUS  PROVISIONS  A. Emergency  leave may be taken by an employee without pay if a personal emergency is experienced by himself or a member of his immediate family as defined in other Sections. Notice shall be given to the Mayor or his designated representative at the earliest poSStole time.

 11  .--  B. If an employee is called to a meeting by the Borough attendance at such meeting shall be considered a part of his regular work and payment shall be made accordingly said payment shall be a minimumof two (2) hours at the appropriate rate.

C. Employees attending an accredited college or university for criminology courses shall be paid twenty-five dollars ($25.) per credit upon obtaining a passing grade with the exception of any correspondence course. However employee must secure the approval of council before attending such school.

D. Court Appearance - An Officer required to attend Court shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours pay if he is required to attend Court on time off. In the event he is required to stay more than four (4) hours he is to be paid for all hours over four (4) hours. Borough is to supply transportation and meal allowance of up to $7.5 per meal with a receipt The Borough shall also pay for parking. If Court attendance is required on a scheduled work day the Officer shall receive his regular pay.

Witness fees are to be returned to the Borough. In addition the Borough shali pay for the Officers meals parking expenses and eight ($8.) dollars for automobile expenses for the officer using his own car.

 E. The Borough shall provide 2 boxes (1 rounds) of fresh ammunition for each officer each year of the Agreement for the purpose of their yearly qualifications. The Borough shall provide two (2) additional boxes of ammunition for officers if utilized with the departments fireanns instructor for training. The Borough shall further pay each officer the appropriate rate of pay for time spent during said qualification should the Borough require said qualification.

 F. The Borough shall adopt a Drug and Alcohol Policy for all members of the Police Department.

Said policy must first be approved by the Union. (Exhibit A) G. The Borough shall provide and pay the total cost for a protective Bullet Proof Vest for all fu11-time police officers equal to a Level 3A. Vest shall be replaced every five (5) years. All full-time officers shall be required to wear said vest at all times while on duty for the Borough of Elizabeth.

H. Both the Union and the Borough recommend that part-time police officers wear a Bullet Proof Vest at all times. To encourage the part-time police officers to purchase Bullet Proof Vest the parties agree that the part-time police officer can reserve all or part of an annual uniform allowance combining it with the following years uniform allowance there by enabling the officer to have sufficient allowance funds to purchase a Bullet Proof Vest without using any of his own money.

 I. It is understood that with the addition of Shift Differentials no full-time officer shall have the right to bump another Officer because of the differential. However any part-time Officer wishing to move to another shift for the differential shall submit a request in writing to the Mayor. The Mayor shall have sole discretion on granting the request and have up to 3 days to make the change.

Multiple requests shall be determined by seniority K. The Borough shall provide one (1) Vehicle Code update per.year for use by the Department.

 L. Police Officers Bill of Rights 1.

 When an anonymous complaint is made against a police officer and no corroborative evidence is obtained the complaint shall be classified as unfounded.

12  2.

 When any citizen complaint is filed greater than ninety (9) calendar days after the date of the alleged event complained of which if true could not lead to a criminal charge such complaintshall be classifiedas unfoundedand the accusedemployeeshall not be required to submit a written report but shall be notified orally or in writing of such claim.

 3.

 A police officer whether a subject or witness must be infonned of the nature of the interrogation if it might involve a violation of the Pennsylvania Crime Code at the outset of the interrogation or interview.

 4.

 If the interrogated police officer writes a written statement a transcript is taken or mechanical record made a copy of the same must be given to the interrogated police officer without cost upon request.

 5.

 If any police officer under interrogation is under arrest or is likely to be placed under arrest as a result of the interrogation he shall be completely informed of all his rights prior to the commencement of the interrogation.

 6.

 At the request of any police officer under interrogation he shall have the right to be represented by a Local Union representative who shall be present at all times during the interrogation. The interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonable time until representation can be obtained.

 7.

 Any police officer shall have the right to review his personnel file upon reasonable advance notice to the Chief.

 8.

 All citizen complaints must be in writing signed and notarized.

 9.

 A police officer shall be allowed to view his personnel file at least once per year upon making a request to the Chief.

 1O.

 Effective immediately upon the signing of this agreement all personnel files will be purged of all disciplinary reports. Also any future disciplinary reports shall only remain in an officers file for up to two (2) years.

 M. All officers shall be required to give a minimum of four (4) hours notice when calling off work except daylight shifts and unless an emergency exists.

N. In the event the Borough has to lay off employees said employees shall be notified in writing with a copy of the same mailed to the Union. The same will be the case in the notification of recall.

 o. If an officer involved in an on duty traumatic incident and is removed by the employer he shall be compensated  for all lost hours of work at his regular rate of pay.

 13  ARTICLE NO. 23 - EFFECTIVE DATES  This Agreement shall become effective as of January 1. 218. and shall continue in effect to and including midnight of December31. 222. Either party may in accordance with the provisions of Act 111 give notice to the other party of the desire to negotiate with respect to the terms and conditions of a new agreement.

FOR THE UNION  FOR THE EMPLOYER    .Y  Secretm)-Treasurer  President of Council  Date  Date  14  distriution of drugs in the workplace such notification must occur within five (5) days of conVIction.

 E. Drug  Alcohol Testing Circumstances The Municipality will conduct drug testing for the following reasons pre-employment random reasonable suspicion post-accident fitness for duty and follow-up to a positive drug test. Alcohol will be tested for all of the above circumstances except pre-employment  1.

 Pre-employment. Prior to employment all hires will be required to undergo drug screening. Hires who test positive will be denied employment. Failure to consent to this screen will be considered as withdrawal of hisher application for employment  2.

 Random Testing. To encourage year round avoidance of illegal drugs and be in compliance with DOTFHW A regulations the Municipality will conduct random tests of the Municipalitys CDL employees at an annualized rate of 5 for drugs and 25 for alcohol. Those to be tested will be selected at random which means that every employee-whether previously tested or not-has an equal chance to be tested every time tests are conducted. Once an individual is notified of the test heshe should go to the collection site immediately.

 3.

 Reasonable Suspicion Testing. May be conducted based upon among other things Direct observation of drug use or possession andor physical symptoms of being under the influence of an illegal drug or alcohol  B.

 A pattern of abnormal conduct or erratic behavior  C.

 Arrest or conviction for a drug or alcohol related offense or identification of the employee as the focus of a criminal investigation into illegal drug possession use or trafficking  4.

 Post-Accident Testing. Is required for drivers and co-drivers who are involved in an accident where death occurs when the driver is issued a citation by the police for a moving violation and someone needs immediate medical treatment away from the scene of the accident or when the employee is issued a citation by the police for a moving violation j-a vehicle must be towed from the scene of the accident. The drug andior breath alcohol test should be conducted as soon as possible after the accident takes place.

 5.

 Relllrn-To-Duty Testing. An employee found to have engaged in prohibited drug and alcohol conduct shall submit to return to duty drug and alcohol testing prior to  6.

 -------  A.

 performing  safety-sensitive  functions.

 Follow-Up  Testing. Employees  who have engaged  in illegal drug or alcohol use shall be  required to submit to drug and alcohol testing a minimum of six (6) times for twelve (12) months following the incident. The number of tests should be greater if deemed necessary by the Municipality or the designated Substance Abuse Professional. Cost of follow-up testing will be borne by the employee.

17  F. Drugsto be tested Urine specimens will be screened for the classes of drugs and at the cutoffs listed below Immunoassay  GCIMS  Drug ScreenCutoffs  Confirmation Cutoffs 1 ngml 5 ngml 5 ngrnl 15 ngml 3 ngml 15 ngml 3 ngml 3 ngml 25 ngml 25 ngml  Amphetamines Cannabiniods (Marijuana) Cocaine and Metabolite Opiates Phencyclidine (PCP)  G. Alcohol Testing As required by 49 CFR Part 4 the alcohol test is to be conducted by a certified breath alcohol technician (B.A.T.) using an evidential breath testing device (E.B.T.) which is approved by the National Highway Safety Administration (NHTSA). Tests are conducted in an area where confidentiality of results is assured. If the alcohol screening testing indicates an alcohol concentration .2 or greater a confirmation test must be done 15-2 minutes later.

H. Collection Site They must follow the guidelines established by the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) for collecting handling and storing urine drug specimens and must meet the exacting chain-of-custody requirements. Alcohol testing can be done only by a certified Breath A1cohol Technician(B.A.T.)using an approved Evident BreathTesting Device (E.B.T.)  I. Unobserved Specimen Collection Individuals shall be permitted to provide urine specimens in private and will not be directly observed. Exceptions to this are rare and are described below.

J. Observed Specimen Collection May occur under the following circumstances      When the specimen fall outside the range of 9.5 to 99.8 degrees Fahrenheit or show signs of contamination When a previous urine specimen provided by the individual was determined by the laboratory to have a specific gravity ofless than 1.3 and a creatinine concentration below .2g1or When the collection site person observes conduct clearly indicating an attempt to substitute or adulterate the sample.

 K. Laboratories to be used Only laboratories certified by the national Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) and the Department of Health and Human Service (DHHS) to conduct Workplace Drug Testing Programs will be used to analyze urine specimens. The NIDADHHS Certification indicates that the laboratory meets the highest standards for drug testing.

 L. Medical Review Officer (MRO) The Municipality will utilize a Medical Review Officer to review and interpret test results obtained through drug testing. The MRO is a physician knowledgeable in the mcxli  w. of prescription  dnlgs  and  the  pharmacology  and  toxicology  of  illicit  drugs.

 Our  Municipality Medical Review Officer service are provided by a third-party administrator.

 ----  The MRO receives test results from the laboratory and evaluates them before notifying the Municipality. Prior to notifying the Municipality the MRO will conduct a medical interview-via phone or in the office-to discuss the individuals medical history and other biomedical factors. He will receive all medical history and other biomedical factors. He will receive all medical records made 18  ---  DRUG  ALCOHOL USE IN THE WORKPLACE A. The Problem Drug and Alcohol abuse is a major health problem in the workplace. It affects all industries age groups economic levels and geographic areas. It jeopardizes safety and reduces productivity. Studies show that employees who abuse drugs and alcohol are more likely to have accidents use more sick leave and file more workers compensation claims. They are also more likely to be absent late for work or leave work early. Further their actions can endanger fellow employees and the general public. Drug and alcohol are a significant factor in highway accidents and deaths.

B. Municipal Philosophy We are committed to providing a safe productive and drug-free workplace.

We recognize that our employees are our most valuable resource and we wish to maintain their healthy well-being. We believe that most substance abuse problems can be prevented or rehabilitated. We encourage employees with such problems to seek counseling.

C. Drug Education Periodically the Municipality will provide employees with information on the effects and consequences of drug use on personal health safety and the work environment. Supervisors will attend classes on how to recognize manifestations and behavioral symptoms of drug and alcohol use.

D. Policy          The lawful manufacture distribution dispensing possession or use of illegal drugs or alcohol is prohibited-in the Municipals workplace.

Illegal drug usage whether on or off the job may adversely affect an employees job perfonnance jeopardize the safety of other employees clients and the general public. As such it is just cause for disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment.

Employees are not permitted to perform safety-sensitive functions within four hours of using alcohol. Employees are not permitted to use alcohol during working hours. No driver should use alcohol for eight hours following an accident or until heshe undergoes a post-accident alcohol whichever occurs first.

1fan employee reports to work in a condition giving a supervisor reasonable cause to suspect the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs the employee may be required to submit to a breath alcohol andor urine drug test If the test reveals that the employee has an alcohol level greater than .4 or has illegal drugs in hisher system the employee will be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination of employment. An employee with an alcohol level .2 to .39 will not be permitted to perform safety-sensitive functions for 24 hours.

When there is reasonable cause vehicles lockers andor related personal areas may be searched without prior notice to ensure a work environment free of alcohol and illegal drugs.

Any employee found to have illegal drugs in hisher vehicle locker andor related personal area will be subject to immediate disciplinary action to and including termination of employment.

employee who may be undergoing medically prescribed treatment with a controlled substance which may limit hisher ability to perform on the job must report this treatment to hisher supervisor prior to beginning work Failure to do this shall be cause for disciplinary action.

   Any    It is a condition of continuing employment with the Municipality for an employee to notify the Municipality if heshe is convicted under a federal or state drug statute for the use sale or 16  available by the tested employee to determine if there might be a legitimate medical reason for a confinned positive test. If there is the MRO will report the test as negative.

 If the MRO is unable to reach a person who tested positive he shall report his efforts to contact the driver to the employers. As soon as possible the employer shall request the driver to contact the MRO prior to dispatching the driver or within 24 hours whichever is sooner.

M. Resorts of Drug Test Results The Medical Review Officer will forward results only to the person designated in the Municipality to receive such results. The MRO shall report whether an individuals test is negative or positive. If positive he will identify the substance for which the test was positive.

 N. Split Sample Testing After the MRO informs an employee that he will be reported to his employer as testing positive for illegal drug use the employee has the right to request that the split sample be tested at another NIDADHHS laboratory. The employee must make this request to the MRO within 72 hours after the MRO-Driver evaluation callvisit. The cost of the second laboratory analysis and MRO review will be borne by the employee. The employee will be reimbursed by the Municipality if the split sample test is negative.

 . Reports of Alcohol Test Results Following a confirmed alcohol test of .2 or greater the Breath Alcohol Technician (B.A.T.) must immediately report the results to the Municipal representative designatedto receive this information. This is done so that the Municipality can take steps to ensure the employee testing positive will not drive hisher vehicle. The designated Borough representative must provide the testing sites with a telephone number where the representative can be reached at all times.

P. Disciplinary Actions  1.

 The use of alcoholic beverages or substances containing alcohol including any medication mouthwash food candy or any other substance while performing Municipal duties is strictly prohibited (see section 7.6 of the Personnel Handbook). An employee who is found to have a breath alcohol concentration of .2 or greater but less than .39 shall not be allowed to perform safety-sensitive for at least 24 hours following the administration of the test. Employees will punch out immediately after testing in this range and-may-not-punch-back-in until-24 hours later. There will be loss of pay during that 24-hour period. Further infractions in this area will incur progressive discipline. A second violation will result in three (3) days suspension from work without pay. A third violation results in termination. Employees whose blood alcohol content is above .4 will immediately be suspended for three (3) days without pay. Employees must then see a substance abuse professional can not drive commercially until they have done so and have been released to active duty by the substance abuse professional.

A second violation in this area will result in termination ifthere are no alcohol violations for three years then the progression through the steps starts over again.

 2.

 An employee who tests positive for drugs will immediately be suspended for three days  pay and must see a substance abuse professional before being allowed to drive commercially. A second violation in this area will result in termination. There is no time limit that can clear a violation  without  3.

 Refusal of Testing Any driver who refuses either drug or alcohol testing will be immediately terminated. There will be no excuse accepted.

19  .

 SubstanceAbuse ProfessionalUnder DOTFHWAdrug and alcohol regulationsan employee who engages in prohibited drug or alcohol conduct shall be referred to a Substance abuse Professional (S.A.P.) for an evaluation and possible referral to a counseling or treatment program. By law the S.A.P. may make specific recommendationsfor follow-up drug and alcohol testing that could last as long as 6 months from a drivers return-to-dutydate. No driver may return to duty without a negative drug and alcohol test and an evaluation by the S.A.P. that the driver has properly followed the rehabilitation program presented by the S.A.P. the cost of S.A.P. shall be borne by Health Insurance or the Employee.

 2  EXHIBITB  ELIZABETH BOROUGHPOLICEDEPARTMENT SUBJECTAlcoholand SubstanceAbuseTesting Procedures NUMBER 6  6. PURPOSE The purpose of this policy is to provide all employees with notice of the provisions of the Departments drug-testing program to ensure all employees are fit for duty.

 6.l POLICY It is the policy of the Police Department that the critical mission of public safety justifies the maintenance of a drug free work environment through the use of a reasonable employee drug-testing program. The Department has a legal responsibility and a management obligation to make it a condition of employment that all Department employees be free of drug dependence illegal drug use or drug abuse alcohol or other substance abuse.

 The law enforcementprofessionhas several uniquelycompellingintereststhatjustify the use of employee drug testing. The public has a right to expect that those who protect them are at all times both physically and mentally prepared to assume these duties. Both the Municipality and its employees are exposed to liability if the Municipality fails to ensure that its employees are able to perform their duties  without endangering themselves or the public. Where law enforcement employees participate in illegal drug use and drug activity the integrity of the law enforcement profession and public confidence in it are destroyed. This confidence is further eroded by the potential for corruption created by drug use.

Toe illegal possession and the use of drugs and narcotics is a crime and clearly unacceptable by Municipal employees. Therefore in order to ensure the integrity of the Department and to preserve public trust and confidence in a fit and drug-free law enforcement profession the Police Department shall implement a drug-testing program to detect prohibited drug use by its employees.

6.2 DEFINITIONS A. Employee Includes sworn police officers communications dispatchers clerks secretaries probationary and part-time employees assigned to the Department.

 B. Probationary Employee A person who is conditionally employed with the Department as an employee.

C.

 Part-time-  Employ  D.

Supervisor Those supervising subordinates.

 A person  who  employees  works  thirty-tvvo  assigned  hours  to a position  21  or less per week.

 having  day-to-day  responsibility  for  E. Drug-Test A urinalysis test consisting of both a drug screen test and a confirmatory test (to be used in the event drug screen test results are positive) administered under approved pre-established conditions and procedures for the purpose of detecting illegal drug use by employees.

 F. Reasonable Suspicion That quantity of proof or evidence that is more than a hunch but less than probable cause. Reasonable suspicion must be based on specific clear and objective facts and any rationally derived inferences from those facts about the conduct of an individual that would lead a reasonable person to suspect that the individual is or has been using drugs or alcohol while on or off-duty.

6.3 RULES OF CONDUCT AND EMPLOYEE RESPONSIBILITIES A. Prohibited Activity The following rules apply all employees while on and off-duty 1.

 No employee shall illegally possess any controlled substance.

 2.

 No employee shall ingest any controlled or other dangerous substance unless as prescribed by a licensed medical practitioner a.

 Employees shall notify their senior shift supervisor on duty when required to use prescription medicine which they have been infonned has the potential to impair job perfonnance. The employee shall advise the supervisor of the known side-effects of such medication and the prescribed period of use.

 b.

 Supervisors shall document this information through the use of an internal memorandum to the Chief of Police. The memorandum shall be retained in a secure file.

 c.

 The supervisor or Chief of Police may temporarily reassign the employee to other duties where it is appropriate.

 3.

 No employee shall ingest any prescribed or over-the counter medication in amounts beyond the recommended dosage.

 4.

 Any employee who unintentionally ingests inhales or is forced to ingest or inhale a controlled substance shall immediately report the incident to their supervisor so that appropriate medical steps may be taken to ensure the employees health and safety.

 5.

 Any employee having a reasonable basis to believe another employee is illegally using or in possession of any controlled substance shall immediately report the facts and circumstances to their supervisor. Failure to do so shall subject the employee to disciplinary  6.

 action.

 Any employee  having a reasonable  basis to believe  another employee  is intoxicated  and  under the influence of alcohol while on duty shall immediately report the facts and circumstances to their supervisor.

 22  B. Any employee who is aware that heshe is dependent upon alcohol and who voluntarily admits the same prior to being ordered to submit to an alcohol test shall not be disciplined. Rather heshe shall be permitted to apply for short-tenn disability for the purpose of obtaining rehabilitative treatment for hisher dependency. This option however shall be afforded to an employee only once during hisher tenure withthe Departmentfor rehabilitative treatment for alcohol dependency.

 C. Any employee who is aware that heshe is dependent upon narcotics whether prescribed or otherwise or upon controlled substances or types of drugs and who voluntarily admits the same prior to being ordered to submit to a drug-test shall be permitted to apply for short term disability for the purpose of obtaining rehabilitative treatment for hisher dependency. This option however shall be afforded to an employee only once during hisher tenure with the Department The Chief of Police shall take into account the facts and circwnstances of the dependency in making any decision to proceed with disciplinary action.

D. Any employee who fails or refuses to submit to a drug or blood alcohol test under the terms and conditions set forth in this policy shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal.

Any employee who does submit to drug or blood alcohol testing pursuant to the. circumstances terms and conditions of this policy and whose confirmatory drug or blood alcohol test indicates a positive result shall be subject to disciplinary action up to and including dismissal  6.4 MANDATORYDRUG-TESTING A. Applicant Drug Testing 1.

 Applicants for employment shall be required to take a drug-test as a condition of employment during a pre-employment medical examination.

 2.

 Applicants shall be disqualified from further consideration for employment under the following circumstances  a.

 Refusal to submit to a required drug-test or  b.

 A confirmed positive drug-test indicating drug use prohibited by this policy.

 B. Probationary Employee Drug-Testing 1.

 2.

 All probationary employees shall be required as a condition of emploent to participate in any un-announced mandatory drug tests scheduled dng their probationary period. The frequency and timing of such tests shall be determined by the Chief of Police or hisher designee.

 In addition where the probationary employee has a past history of drug use heshe shall bc  rc-cs-i.rcd  to  -s-.bmit  to  -.a.n.doTn.

 t.ests  u.n.1i.l the  probationary  period  is  successfully  completed. The frequency and timing of such testing shall be determined by the Chief of Police or hisher designee.

 23  C. Other Employees  I.

 Emloyees will be reqired to submit to drug or blood alcohol testing as a condition of continuedemploymentm order to ascertainprohibitedactivityas providedbelow  a.

 A supervisor may order an 1p1oyee to take a drug or blood alcohol test upon documented reasonable susp1c1on that the employee is or has been using drugs or alcohol. A summary of the facts supporting the order shall be made available to the employee prior to the actual test.

 b.

 On a random selection basis as outlined in this policy.

 c.

 As a condition for appointment to designated specialized units within the department.

 cl.

 When a firearm is discharged by an officer either accidentally or intentionally and a supervisor has reason to believe the employee is under the influence of drugs or alcohol  e.

 Upon promotion to a higher rank.

 f  When an employee is involved in a vehicle accident while operating a Department vehicle in which there is a fatality andor critical injury or when a supervisor has reasonable suspicion that the employee is under the influence of drugs or alcohol.

 6.5 PROCEDURE FOR DRUGALCOHOL TESTING BASED ON REASONABLE SUSPICION A. The supervisor ordering an employee to submit to a drugalcohol test shall prepare a report setting forth the specific facts and reasons which form the basis for the reasonable suspicion that lead to the order for testing. The report shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police who B. The supervisor ordering the test shall arrange to have the suspected employee immediately transported to the hospital emergency room and shall arrange for the suspected employee to be absent from hisher assignment for this purpose in the most discreet manner possible and whenever possible without advising additional personnel of the reason for the employees absence.

C. No disciplinary action shall be taken against an employee who has been ordered to take and has taken a drugalcohol test-based on reasonable suspicion during the period between the time heshe is ordered to take the test and the Department is advised of the test results. During that period however the employee shall be placed on Administrative Leave with pay and shall be required to surrender hiuh  wpon  6oth  . ion  hClll bw . wmplishcod  most  discrcetly  and  VYhcnevcr  possible  v.ithout  advising other personnel of the reasons for the action.

D. If confirmatory tests of an employees test indicates a positive result the Chief of Police shall initiate appropriate disciplinary or administrative action.

 24  6.6 PROCEDURES FOR DRUG-TESTING ON RANDOM SELECTION BASIS A. The e11pioyee selection rocedure will be governed by a secured selection process. The Borough Managerwill make the selectionof employees to be tested by meansof a randomselectionprocess.

 B. To ensure anonymityin the selection process the Department will assign a code number for each employee. This number will be generated using a specific formula. A list of these code numbers will be provided to the Municipal Manager where the random selection process will take place.

C. Twice a year the Borough Manager will provide the Chief of Police with a list of those code numbers which have been randomly selected. The department will convert the code numbers to names and those individuals will be ordered to undergo testing.

D. The Chief of Police shall notify the senior supervisor of those employees selected as to when or where those employees selected are to appear to provide a urine sample for a drug screening test. It shall be the responsibility of the supervisor to make sure that the employees are notified and appear for testing.

 E. Officers on vacation sick leave or injury leave when they are selected shall not have to take the test at that time.

 6.7 DRUG TESTING PROCEDURES A. The testing procedures and safeguards provided in this policy to ensure the integrity of department drug-testing shall be adhered to by all personnel administering drug and blood alcohol tests.

 B. The Department urine sample and blood alcohol collection sites are the hospital emergency room or any other site which may be so designated by the Department The procedures shall not be designed to unknowingly demean embarrass or cause physical discomfort to the employee being tested C. Personnel authorized to administer drug and blood alcohol tests shall require positive identification from each employee to be tested before they enter the testing site.

D. Prior to testing the employee shall be provided by personnel at the testing facility with a form which the employee shall execute consenting to a urinalysis or blood alcohol test and shall contain an authorization for the release of medical information to the Department. The form shall specify inter alia that its use shall be limited to internal administrative purposes only and that it shall not be used in connection with any criminal investigation or prosecution of the employee. If the employee shall fail or refuse to execute the form heshe shall not be tested. Such failure or refusal however shall be deemed to be a failure or refusal to submit to a duly authorized drug or blood alcohol test and shall constitute a disobedience to an order as well as a violation of this policy and this shall subject the employee so failing  or rusing  to disciplinary  action  which  could include  dismissal.

 Any such failure  or refusal  shall be reported to the Chief of Police or supervisor authorizing the drug or alcohol test. The Chief of Police or supervisor shall initiate a complaint against the employee for a violation of this policy and for failure to obey an order from a superior.

.

 E. The employee shall indicate on the consent form any prescription or over-the-counter medication that heshe has taken within four days prior to the date of the testing and if so in what quantities and 25  at approximately what times. Nothing herein however shall in any respect modify the employees responsibilities under Section 63.3(2)(a) above.

F. The testing facility area shall be private and secure.

1.

 Authorized testing personnel shall search the facility before an employee enters it to produce a urine sample and document that it is free from any foreign substances.

 2.

 The employee to be tested shall disrobe before entering the bathroom facility and be provided with a light robe.

  3.

 Testing personnel of the sarnesex shall observe production of the urine sample.

 G. Whenever there is reason to believe the employee may have altered or substituted the specimen to be provided a second specimen shall be obtained imrnediafely under direct observation of the testing personnel.

 H. Where the employee appears unable or unwilling to give a specimen at the time of the test testing personnel shall document the circumstances on the drug-testing report form. The employee shall be permitted no more than eight hours to give a sample during which time heshe shall remain in the testing area under observation. Reasonable amounts of water may be given to the employee to encourage urination. Failure to submit a sample shall be considered a refusal to submit to a drug-test.

I. Employees shall have the right to request that their urine sample be split and stored in case of legal disputes. The urine samples must be provided at the same time and marked and placed in identical containers by authorized testing personnel. One sample shall be submitted for immediate drug screening. The other sample shall remain in the custody testing facility in frozen storage. This sample shall be made available to the employee or hisher attorney should the original sample result in a legal dispute or the chain of custody be broken.

 J. Specimen samples shall be sealed labeled and checked against the identity of the employee to ensure the results match the tested specimen. Samples shall be stored in a secured and refrigerated atmosphere until tested or delivered to the testing laboratory representative.

 K. The Ch.ief of Police or the authorizing supervisor shall be notified after the urine sample has been collected.

 L. In the case of a drug or blood alcohol test based on reasonable suspicion the results of the employees drug screen or blood alcohol test shall be furnished to the supervisor ordering the test as soon as they are known.

lll  In the  case  or a positive  test result on the drug-screening  test  a confirmatory  as expeditiously as possible and the results forwarded to the Chief of Police.

6.8 DRUG TESTING METHODOLOGY ---.

 A. The testing or processing phase shall consist of a two-step procedure.

 26  test will be conducted  1.

 Initial screening test and  2.

 Confirmation test.

 B. The urine sample is first tested using the initial drug screening procedure. An initial positive test result shall not be considered conclusive rather it will be classified as confirmation pending.

C. A specimen testing positive shall undergo an additional confirmatory test. The confirmation procedure shall be technologically different and more sensitive than the initial screening test.

 D. The drug screening tests selected shall be capable of identifying marijuana cocaine and every major drug of abuse including heroin amphetamines barbiturates and anabolic steroids. Personnel utilized for testing shall be certified as qualified to collect urine samples or adequately trained in collection procedures.

E. Concentrations of a drug at or above the following levels shall be considered a positive test result when using the initial immunoassay drug-screening test Initial Test Level ngml Marijuana Metabolite.

1 Cocaine Metabolite .

3 3 Opiate Metabolites . .

25 Phencyclidine . .

1 Amphetamines . .

Anabolic Steroids . .

25ngml if immunoassay specific for free morphine  F. Concentrations of a drug at or above the following levels shall be considered a positive test result when performing a confirmatory GCMS test on a urine specimen that tested positive using a technologically different initial screening method Marijuana Metabolite.

Cocaine Metabolite .

Opiates Morphine . .

Codeine . .

Phencyclidine .

Amphetamines Amphetamine .

Methampbetamine.

Anabolic  Steroids  .

 15-(1) .15 (a) 3 3 25  5 5  .

 (1) Delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol-9carboxylic (2) Benzoylecgonine  acid  G. The laboratory selected to conduct the analysis shall be experienced and pabl of uali control documentation chain-of-custody technical expertise and demonstrated proficiency m unnalys1s.

27  r--  6.9 CHAIN OF EVIDENCE AND STORAGE A. Each step in the collection and processing of the urine specimen shall be documented to establish procedural integrityand the chain-of-custody.

 B. Wherea positiveresult is confinned urine specimens shall be maintained in securerefrigerated storage for an indefinite period.

 6.1 CONFIDENTIALITYOF DOCUMENTATION A. If the results of the confirmatory test are positive all documentation generated in connection with the perfonnance of the test including the consent and release from records made in connection with specimen collection and the test results shall be made available to both the employee and the Chief of Police. There shall be no dissemination of said documents to the public except as may be necessary by a board hearing and subsequent appeals. Neither said documentation nor the information contained therein shall be used for the purposes of criminal investigation or prosecution. Nor shall any such documentation or the information contained therein be made known in connection with any request for a job reference for the employee from outside the department except as made public as a result of a board hearing or appeal.

 ----  B. If the results of the test are negative or if the results of the confinnatory test indicate the presence of only prescribed or over-the-counter medication all documentation generated in connection with the perfonnance of the test including the consent and release fonn records made in connection with specimen collection and test results shall be maintained by the Chief of Police in a file separate from the employees medical file in strictest confidence available only to the employee or his representative upon production of written authorization. There shall be no dissemination of said documents to the public nor shall any such documentation or the information contained therein be made known in connection with any request for a job reference for the employee from outside the department.

C. Any and all actions required to be taken by this order shall be effected with the utmost discretion and with the involvement of as few personnel as possible. Further individuals acting pursuant to this policy or having knowledge of actions taken pursuant to this policy shall not discuss said actions with others either within or without the Department except as may be required by this policy or as may be dictatd by necessity and then such actions shall be discussed only on a need-to-know basis.

D. Drug-test results and records shall be stored and retained in compliance with state law or for an indefinite period in a secured area where there is no applicable state law.

 28    
