Township of Findlay  Me111ora11du111 of Understanding between  The Tow11ship of Fi11dlay and  the Findlay Tow11ship Police Departmeit Wage a11dPolicy U11it Ja11uary 1 217 through December 31 221  Preamble n1is Memorandum of Understanding is entered into by and between the Township of Findlay and the Findlay Township Police Department Wage and Policy Unit.

 1  Table of Contents  SECTION ARTICLE I ARTICLE II ARTICLE III ARTICLE IV ARTICLEV ARTICLE VI ARTICLE VII ARTICLE VIII ARTICLE IX ARTICLEX ARTICLE XI ARTICLE XII  ARTICLE XIII ARTICLE XIV ARTICLE XV ARTICLE XVI ARTICLE XVII ARTICLE XVIII ARTICLE XIX ARTICLE XX ARTICLEXXI AR TI CLE XXII ARTICLE XXIII ARTICLE XXIV ARTICLEXXV AR TICLE XXVI ARTICLE XXVII AR TICLE XXVIII  PAGE  TITLE RECOGNITION TERM DEFINITIONS SALARIES HOURS OF WORK USE OF PRIVATE AUTOMOBILES HOLIDAYS VACATIONS UNIFORM AND EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE ACCIDENT AND SICKNESS DISABILITY INCOME INSURANCE LIABILITY HOSPITALIZATION AND OTHER INSURANCE GROUP INSURANCE HOSPITALIZATION AND MEDICAL INSURANCE VISION PLAN SICK LEAVE TIME SPENT IN COURT LEGAL EXPENSES SCHOOLS LONGEVITY PAY OVERTIME BY SENIORITY PENSIONS PAST POLICIES AND PRACTICES PAYDAYS BEREAVEMENT LEAVE AMMUNITION EDUCATION INCENTIVE PROBATIONARY PATROL OFFICERS CALEA CLAUSE INVALIDATION CLAUSE  2  3  3 3 5 7 8  8 8 1  1 1 11  12 12 13  14 14 14 15 15 16 17  17  17 17 18  18 19  Township of Findlay  ARTICLE I - RECOGNITION  The township of Findlay hereby recognizes the Findlay Township Police Department Wage and Policy Unit as the exclusive bargaining representative for all its employees on Police Officer positions.

 ARTICLE II-TERM  This agreement shall be effective from January 1 217 through December 31 222. Included within the contract period is a re-opener in 22 for wage increments concerning years 221 and 222. If the Cadillac Tax goes into effect January 1 22 the parties agree to re-open negotiations on the limited issue of the Cadillac Tax.

 ARTICLE III - DEFINITIONS  The following tenns shall apply to persons employed as Police Officers in the Township of Findlay A. Police Officer shall mean only full-time Township Police Officers (including those on a probationary status) but excluding the Chief of Police except in Articles XI and XVI concerning liability false arrest insurance and legal expenses which also covers part-time officers.

B. Part-Time Police Officer shall mean a police officer who shares the same duties and responsibilities as a full time Police Officer and is scheduled less than forty (4) per week.

C. Senior Police Officer shall mean any Police Officer with over three (3) years of service and having no rank.

D. Base Wage Rate means a given Police Officers base annual wage divided by 28 hours.

It is also referred to herein as straight time rate.

E. Overtime Paymeans pay at an hourly rate of time and one-half ofa given Police Officers base wage rate.

F. Court Time means any time except magisterial court time spent at any judicial proceedings arising out of police work (excepting civil cases) where the Police Officers presence is required for processing or prosecution of the case.

3  G. Magisterial Court Time means any time spent at any magisterial court proceeding arising out of police work (excepting civil cases) where the Police Officers presence is required for processing or prosecution of the case.

H. Detective means any full-time Police Officer who is assigned primarily to investigation.

I. Canine Handler means any full-time Police Officer who is assigned primarily to the canine K-9 function.

 4  ARTICLE IV - SALARIES  Basic annual salary rates shall be established based on years of incumbency service as follows  Effective Ja11uary1 217 tfe base a1111ua wage i11cludesa (3.5) rate i11crease.

SERVICE Part Time Up to one (1) year Up to two (2) years Up to three (3) years Over three (3) years (Senior Police Officer) Detective Function OIC 1 Function Function OIC 2 Functions Sergeant Captain  HOURLY RATE $29.15 $33.25 $37.74 $42.24 $44.93 $46.73 $47.18 $49.42 $5.31 $55.34  Effective Ja11uary 1 218 the base a1111ualwage includes a (3.5) rate increase.

 SERVICE Part Time Up to one (1) year Up to two (2) years Up to three (3) years Over three (3) years (Senior Police Officer) Detective Function OIC 1 Function Function OIC 2 Functions Sergeant Captain  HOURLY RATE $3. I 7 $34.41 $39.6 $43.72 $46.5 $48.37 $48.83 $51.15 $52.7 $57.28  5  Effective Ja11uary1 219 tle a1111ual wage i11cludesa (3.5) rate i11crease.

SERVICE Part Time Up to one (1) year Up to two (2) years Up to three (3) years Over three (3) years (Senior Police Officer) Detective Function OIC 1 Function Function OIC 2 Functions Sergeant Captain  HOURLY RATE $31.23 $35.61 $4.43 $45.25 $48.13 $5.6 $5.54 $52.94 $53.89 $59.28  Re-opener in 219 for increments concerning years 22 and 221.

  The above figures do not include any longevity pay.

Any person hired as a Police Officer after January I 1997 will have a basic salary rate as follows Up to one (1) year - 74 of Senior Police Officer base salary Up to two (2) years - 84 of Senior Police Officer base salary Up to three (3) years - 94 of Senior Police Officer base salary (Note Senior Police Officer is defined as being a Police Officer with over three (3) full time years of service with this department and no rank.) A Canine Handler shall be provided compensation at a rate of $8. per hour to care for the animal. Up to  hour per work day while on duty may be allotted for the handler to provide the necessary basic care such as feeding and exercising the canine. While off duty on pass days or vacation it is agreed that  hour per day would be needed to care for the animal at the compensation rate of $8. per hour or $4. per day. This Canine Handler compensation rate would include all care and maintenance issues such as feeding grooming veterinary appointments and non-duty related events. When the canine team is required to respond for police related business such as emergency callouts or unscheduled events the handler would receive hisher normal rate of overtime pay.

A Detective shall earn (4) above the Senior Police Officer rate.

A Function OIC shall earn five percent (5) above the Senior Police Officer rate for each function assigned up to the maximum of a ten percent (1) total increase. Ranking officers who are in charge of a function or functions are not entitled to additional Function OIC pay.

A Sergeant shall earn twelve percent (12) above the Senior Police Officer rate.

A Captain shall earn ten percent ( 1) above the Sergeants rate.

Any Police Officer promoted to a higher rank shall receive one-half (12) the percentage() commensurate with the percentage() allotted that rank during the probationary period of that rank. (Example If a Sergeam earns ten percent (1) ahole a Senior Police Officers rate that probationay Sergeant shall earn five percent (5) above the Senior Police Officers rate for the duration of the probationay period.) 6  Anytime the Police Captain andor Sergeants assume or is appointed to the position of Acting Chief or OIC of the department in the absence of the Chief of Police forecasted or not for forty (4) or more consecutive working hours (defined as (5) consecutive days) the OIC of the department shall receive the salary of the Chief of Police for the entire time of absence. The Acting Chief or OIC must not be on scheduled vacation personal compensatory or sick time to receive such pay.

 ARTICLE V - HOURS OF WORK  A. Either eight (8) or ten ( 1) hours depending on the officers assigned schedule shall constitute the normal days work and forty (4) hours a normal weeks work. Overtime work consists of any hours of work rounded off to the next highest quarter hour in excess of eight (8) or ten (1) hours on any regularly scheduled work day or forty (4) hours in any regularly scheduled work week. There shall be no pyramiding of overtime. The overtime pay rate shall be one and one-half (1 12) times the basic hourly salary rate for each hour of overtime work performed by an employee divided by two thousand eighty (28 hours.) A day is a continuous twenty-four (24) hour period beginning at the regular starting of the Police Officers shift. A workweek is a seven (7) consecutive day period beginning at 121 a.m.

Sunday. Note See section VII - Holidays for overtime hours worked on a holiday.

B. Compensatory Time - Any Police Officer may accumulate compensatory time in lieu of overtime. Compensatory time shall be accumulated at the rate of time and one halfjust as overtime is accumulated. Compensatory time may be accumulated in lieu of overtime in any situation in which overtime is involved i.e. continuation of shift mandatory training court time etc. subject to the approval of the Chief of Police or his designee. (Example A Police Officer attends magistrate court in which a minimum of two (2) hours court time is accumulated. That officer may accumulate three (3) hours compensatory time in lieu of the two (2) hours court time at the rate of time and one half.) Compensatory time may be scheduled as a day off by the officer with the approval of the Chief of Police or his designee depending on scheduling needs. The request for compensatory time will be made with as much notice as possible prior to the requested day off. Compensatory time may also be utilized by a Police Officer either at the beginning (to begin a shift late) or at the end (to leave early) of a shift as long as the compensatory time is approved by the Chief of Police or his designee. The amount will be at the discretion of the Chief of Police or his designee and will remain a management right as is the schedule.

1. Additional stipulations on the use of compensatory time are as follows a. No limit on compensatory time .

 b. In the last 36 months of employment only 8 hours per year or 24 hours imaximum compensatory time will be used for pension calculations.

fr1H c. The remaining compensatory time will be paid at rate when the compensatory time was earned.

 .Af  ce---  2.rv  7  ARTICLE VI - USE OF PRIVATEAUTOMOBILES  All Police Officers and Part-Time Police Officers shall be reimbursed at the current IRS rate when scheduled to use their privately owned automobile while on departmental business provided however that no employee shall be entitled to any reimbursement when said employee files for and receives a mileage fee from any third party or court of competent jurisdiction. The employees shall also be reimbursed for any parking fee while on departmental business.

 ARTICLE VII - HOLIDAYS  A. Police Officers shall be granted paid holidays as follow New Years Day General Election Day Good Friday Veterans Day Primary Election Day Thanksgiving Day Memorial Day Christmas Day Independence Day Four (4) Personal Days Labor Day B. Police Officers not scheduled to work on any of the above days shall be paid eight (8) hours pay at his basic hourly salary rate for such holidays.

C. Police Officers who work on any of the above days shall be paid sixteen (16) hours holiday pay at hisher regular rate of pay in addition to the eight (8) hours calculated in hisher base pay. In lieu of receiving holiday pay the employee may work at hisher basic salary rate and be allowed to acquire sixteen (16) hours compensatory time (eight (8) holiday and eight (8) compensatory.) D. If any holiday named above shall fall within a Police Officers vacation period such holiday shall not be considered a part of such vacation period and the Police Officer shall be given an additional day off or holiday pay.

E. In order to be eligible for holiday pay the Police Officer must have worked on his last scheduled shift before the holiday and his first scheduled shift after the holiday unless he is unable to do so for good cause.

F. Overtime hours worked on a holiday shall be paid at the holiday rate pay scale as long as the overtime is first approved by a supervisor.

 ARTICLE VIII - VACATIONS  8  Eligibility A Police Officers will be provided vacation time off from work without loss of pay under this agreement. To be eligible for a full vacation in any calendar year hereof however a Police Officer must I) Have an annual employment anniversary day in the calendar year in which the vacation is to be taken.

2) Vacation Upon Resignation - A Police Officers vacation shall be pro-rated on an annual basis dependent upon that officers resignation. (i.e. a Police Officer who is entitled to 4 weeks vacation and resigns after 6 months of the new year would be entitled to 2 weeks vacation. If the officer would have already taken 4 weeks vacation and resigns after 6 months into the year the officer would be required to reimburse the township for 2 weeks etc.) An officer who has accumulated enough time to vest his pension ( 12 years) shall be entitled to receive his vacation pay for that year at the beginning of that calendar year.

3) Vacation Upon Retirement -An officer who is retiring will not be able to buy back any vacation time. If an officer has any unused vacation time remaining upon his retirement date the officer will be required to exhaust his remaining vacation time prior to his retirement date. If an officer decides to retire before using all of his vacation time he will not be compensated for it.

Length of Service A. An eligible Police Officer who in any calendar year of this agreement has attained years of continuous service indicated on the following table shall be granted time off commensurate therewith as follows Years of Service Up to 1 year 1 to 2 years 3 to 4 years 5 to 8 years 9 to 15 years 16 to 2 years 21 years and over  Vacation  weeks 1 week 2 weeks 3 weeks 4 weeks 5 weeks 6 weeks  Vacation Scheduling A. The scheduling of vacation shall be in accordance with seniority. The most senior Police Officer shall have the first choice and so on until all vacations are scheduled. The vacation book shall be distributed in the fall of the year proceeding the year in which the vacations are to be taken. In the event two members schedule vacation during the same time period the officer scheduling that vacation period first shall have the priority of that vacation time. The Chief of Police shall have discretion during a crisis situation or in extreme times of insufficient police manpower to cancel a vacation and to have the affected member reschedule the vacation at another time.

 9  ARTICLE IX - UNIFORMAND EQUIPMENTALLOWANCE  A. Each Police Officer shall be granted a unifonn and equipment allowance each calendar year of one thousand dollars ($1.). Any officer going over hisher uniform allowance shall have the balance subtracted from the following years unifonn allowance as long as approved by the Chief of Police or his designee. Any officer going over his unifonn allowance without pennission of the Chief of Police or his designee may be subject to disciplinary action.

B. Each Police Officer shall receive an allowance of Two Hundred Dollars ($2.) per year for the cleaning ofunifonns.

C. The Township shall pay for repairs andor replacement of police uniform damaged in the line of duty.

D. The Township shall provide new body armor for each Police Officer every five (5) years in addition to the unifonn allowance for that year.

E. Any officer assigned primarily to an investigative (Detective) position may utilize one-half ( 12) of hisher unifonn allowance to purchase civilian clothing. The officer must submit the appropriate receipts to be reimbursed for such purposes.

F. Unifonn and Equipment Allowance - The Township shall provide and maintain exercise equipment for sworn and non-sworn personnel so that both may have access to necessary equipment to comply with the departmental physicians established height and weight requirements. This equipment may include but not be limited to free weights aerobic exercise equipment (steppers exercise cycles treadmills etc.) and nautilus equipment.

 ARTICLEX - ACCIDENTAND SICKNESSDISABILITYINCOMEINSURANCE  A. The Township shall provide insurance for short-tenn accident and sickness disability which will provide benefits of seventy-five (75) percent of the officers basic weekly salary for a period ofup to twenty-six (26) weeks for officers disabled by reason of non-service related sickness or accident.

B. The Township shall provide insurance for long-tenn accident and sickness disability which will provide benefits of sixty-five (65) percent of the officers basic weekly salary who is totally disabled by reason of non-service related sickness or accident with benefits to commence after twenty-six (26) weeks of disability and continue to age sixty-five (65) or attainment of nonnal retirement age whichever shall come first.

 ARTICLE XI - LIABILITY  The unit shall be covered by Law Enforcement AgencyOfficers Professional Liability Insurance which is presently being written by the Imperial Casualty  Indemnity Company and which includes false arrest insurance.

 False Arrest Insurance A The Unit shall be covered with the following False Arrest Insurance 1) The insurance afforded is only with respect to personal injury arising out of an offense included within such of the following groups of offenses as are indicated by specific premium charge or charges a) False Arrest Detention or Imprisonment or Malicious Prosecution . ABC b) Libel Slander Defamation or Violation of right of Privacy .

c) Wrongful Entry or Eviction or other Invasion of Right of Private Occupancy  Minimum Premium $ Limits of Liability  Total Provisional Premium$ $1. each person aggregate $1. general aggregate Insured persons participation nil Life Insurance A. The Township shall provide at its expense a $5 Life Insurance Policy for Police Officers.

B. The Township shall provide for the payment of Double Indemnity in the event that the Police Officer dies in the line of duty.

 ARTICLE XII- HOSPITALIZATION AND OTHER INSURANCE GROUP INSURANCE HOSPITALIZATION AND MEDICAL INSURANCE  A. The Township shall provide for each Police Officer their spouses and dependents a premium medical coverage under the Highmark Premium PPO Blue $1. plan as provided by Highmark Health Insurance Company or a comparable equal plan.

Employee contributions will be equal to 2.5 of the cost of the hospitalization plan selected i.e. (Single Family etc.) The Board of Supervisors and Bargaining Unit both agree that the employee contribution to the increased cost of the hospitalization plan selected may increase up to 3.5 for the duration of this contract. This contribution will be paid through a pre-taxed payroll deduction plan. The Township can change to a carrier or plan that is equivalent to the current carrier or plan. It is understood that equivalent does not mean exactly the same. It is the intention of the parties to provide Wage and Policy Unit members with a policy which taken in its entirety is as good as or better than the current coverage.

B. The Township shall provide for each Police Officer their spouses and dependents the highest benefit dental plan covering braces and dentures.

C. Police Officers who retire after December 31 1978 shall be permitted to elect to remain in the Hospitalization Plan also Medical Group Insurance Plans after their retirement.

D. Police Officers who are hired after September 1 216 who retire with twenty-five (25) years of service after 1994 shall receive a 97 .5 paid Premium Health Care Hospitalization Plan equal to the Health Care Plan that was in effect at the time the 11  officer retired until the Police Officer andor Spouse attain Medicare eligible age. This benefit is only entitled to the officers spouse as long as the retired officer and spouse remain married. In the event of divorce the retired officers spouse is no longer eligible to receive this benefit. In the event the officer or retired officer dies prior to his or her spouse the spouse shall continue to receive the benefit until the spouse attains Medicare eligible age.

 ARTICLEXIII - VISION PLAN  The township shall provide by self-insuring a vision care plan which will cover vision examinations lenses and frames. The plan shall cover five-hundred dollars ($5.) worth of vision expenses per family member per year.

The following option now exists for Police Officers only (family members not included.) The officer may elect refractive eye surgerylaser surgery which will now be covered under our current vision care plan. The Township will appropriate the initial cost for such surgery and in return the individual officer would give up their vision benefit until the bill for the said surgery has been satisfied. (Example An itemized bill of $2. would require a five (5) year period for the Township to satisfy their initial expense. Any additional eye treatment i.e.

exams lenses frames etc. during the surgery reimbursement period will be the responsibility of the individual officer. Family members will still maintain original vision care coverage.

 ARTICLEXIV - SICK LEAVE  A. Sick leave shall not be considered as a privilege that a Police Officer may use at his discretion but shall only be allowed in case of actual sickness or disability of the Police Officer. To receive compensation for sick leave while absent the Police Officer must notify the Chief of Police or the officer in charge of his shift at least one (1 hour prior to the scheduled starting time of his tour of duty. The one hour shift notice shall be waived in case of sudden incapacitation.

B. When the absence is for more than five (5) days the Police Officer shall be required to file a physicians certificate unless the Chief has knowledge of the Police Officers sickness or disability. A request form for sick leave furnished by the Township must be filled out immediately upon the Police Officers return to work.

C. A Police Officer earns sick leave at the rate of one and one quarter (1-14) workday per month or fifteen ( 15workdays per year.

D. A Police Officer who returns to work after an absence of thirty (3) work days or more shall be required to pass a physical examination or obtain a release from a doctor stating that he is sufficiently recovered from the injury or illness which caused the aforesaid absence so that he is able to perform his duties.

 12  E. A police officer who is absent due to an injury or illness which may be compensated for under workmens compensation shall not use sick leave but shall use workmens compensation during the time of such injury or illness.

F. In case of failure of a Police Officer to report any injury sustained by him within twenty-four (24) hours of its occurrence to the Chief of Police it shall be presumed that such injury resulted from his own negligence unless proof to the contrary is introduced by said Police Officer.

G. A Police Officer injured on any unapproved gainful employment other than the Township employment shall not be eligible for sick leave.

H. Any Police Officer found to be abusing the sick leave privilege in any manner shall be subject to severe discipline to include discharge.

I. A Police Officer may accumulate two hundred (2) sick days.

J. Upon accumulation of one hundred twenty ( 12) sick days an officer may choose to sell back at 25 of the current hourly wage any number of sick days in the excess of the one hundred twenty ( 12) at any time. Any accumulation of sick days over two hundred (2) will automatically be bought back at the end of the year by the township at the rate of 25 of the officers current hourly rate. (Example - An officer has 15 sick days accumulated.

He sells back 3 days at 25 of the current wages for that contract year and still has 12 days sick leave accrued. Example - An officer has 195 sick days accrued going into next year. During that year he accrues 15 additional sick days which gives the officer 21 accrued sick days. The Township automatically buys back 1 sick days at 25 of the base rate for the calendar year and the officer still has 2 sick days accrued.) K. Upon retirement (twenty-five (25) years of service fifty (5) years of age) of the Police Officer the Township will buy back up to one hundred twenty (12) sick days at the rate of fifty percent (5) of the officers basic daily wage at the time of his retirement.

L. During any calendar year a Police Officer may use three (3) earned sick days as Family Medical Leave Days. Family Medical Leave Days are to be used in the event an immediate family member who is ill or is in need of a pre-planned medical appointment with notice given as soon as possible upon learning of the medical appointment and requires the Police Officers assistance. The family member shall be defined and limited to spouse children parents and siblings who reside with the officer. The Family Medical Leave Days are not to be used in association with Bereavement Leave as defined in Article XXIII of this contract.

 ARTICLE XV - TIME SPENT IN COURT  A. Any Police Officer who shall be required to appear in Criminal or Juvenile Court (Court time) during off-duty hours shall be paid a minimum of four (4) hours at time and one half (1-12) and for actual time spent for any hours over four (4) at the rate of time and one half ( 1-12). The Police Officer shall also be entitled to receive whatever witness fee may be paid.

B. Any Police Officer who shall be required to appear before a member of the minor judiciary during off-duty hours (Magisterial Court Time) shall be paid a minimum of two (2) hours pay at time and one-half(l-12) and for actual time spent for any hours over two (2) at the rate of time and one-half (1-12).

 13  C. Any Police Officer who is scheduled for duty while in court shall only receive the time and one-half (1-12) rate while on off-duty-time. (Example If an officeris scheduled for criminal court at 9 A.M. and is scheduled for duty at 11 A.M. the officer is only eligible to receive time and one-half (1-12) rate from 9 A.M. to 11 A.M.).

 ARTICLE XVI - LEGAL EXPENSES  A. If any criminal or civil action is brought against any Police Officer as a result of acts performed in the course of hisher employment as a Police Officer the Township shall pay the said Police Officers legal expenses including without limitations attorney fees.

B. Findlay Township agrees to fully indemnify all Police Officers for all legal expenses and fees judgments awards and other related expenses pertaining to all litigation including both compensatory and punitive damages when litigation is initiated as a result of actions taken by an officer acting under the color of hisher office and the action taken is in accordance with departmental written directives or past practices. This clause is retroactive to any litigation filed prior to 1992 contract year.

 ARTICLEXVII - SCHOOLS  Any Police Officer who attends any school or courses of instruction pertaining to police work with the approval of the Township Supervisors will be entitled to reimbursement for any expenses incurred while attending such school or course of instruction. Such reimbursement to include $.22 per mile traveled for on round trip traveling to and from said school. Any school training or related department business requiring overnight stay the Police Officer shall receive a per diem in the amount of forty five dollars ($45) per day for meals.

 ARTICLEXVIII - LONGEVITYPAY  All Police Officers governed by this contract shall be entitled to longevity pay in accordance with the following eligibility requirements and rates of pay  Minimum of five (5) years service - 3.5 ofbase salary per year but less than ten (1) years  Minimum often (1) years service - 4. ofbase salary per year but less than fifteen (15) years  Minimum of fifteen (15) years - 4.5 ofbase salary per year service but less than twenty (2) years  14    Minimum of twenty (2) years of service  - 5. of base salary per year  An additional seven percent (7) will be applied to the above listed longevity pay rates for the contract period to be reviewed annually. Upon conclusion of the contract year the Township in agreement with the members bound by this contract will either eliminate or adjust accordingly the seven percent (7) rate based on the soundness of pension actuarial studies. The adjustment would not affect the current longevity requirements andor rates as listed above.

 Longevity pay will be accumulated and paid annually on each officers anniversary date of hire.

 ARTICLE XIX - OVERTIMEBY SENIORITY  General overtime shall be assigned based on a rotation of the officers current roster by seniority i.e. officers will be listed and offered to work overtime in order of the list. If an officer declines the overtime conflicts with his current work schedule or the officer is unable to be contacted it is considered a Pass for that specific overtime and the next officer on the list will be offered the overtime. Each time overtime is offered the officer following the last officer assigned overtime will be offered the overtime first and the process will follow as delineated above.

When additional overtime is required preceding the beginning of a certain shift or continuing into an existing shift that overtime shall be scheduled at the discretion of a supervisor or OIC of the shift.

 ARTICLE XX - PENSIONS  A. All Police Officers hired prior to January 1 215 may retire with a pension at age fifty (5) or thereafter provided they have completed a minimum of twenty-five (25) years of continuous service. Per the wage re-opener of 214 all Police Officers hired on or after January 1 215 may retire with a pension at age fifty-five (55) or thereafter provided they have completed a minimum of twenty-five (25) years of continuous service.

B. The Board of Supervisors and Bargaining Unit made and agreement on November 9 216 specifying the following. Subsection Bl of this article (XX) shall apply only to Police Officers and part time officers (if and when they are made Police Officers) who are hired before September 1 216 who shall be exempt from the subsection 82 of this Article (XX).

Subsection B2 of this Article (XX) shall only apply to all Police Officers hired after September 1 216.

1) The amount of the pension benefit shall be fifty percent (5) of the monthly average salary of the officer during the last thirty-six (36) months of hisher employment.

Pension calculations are based on gross earnings as reported in the officers W2 form as outlined in 526 PA 324 A.2d 366 (1991) (Paylock Vs W. Mifflin).

 15  C.

 D.

 E.

 F.

 G.

 H.

 2) The amount of the pension benefit shall be fifty percent (5) of the monthly average gross salary as reported on the officers W-2 form plus longevity but excluding sick time buyback comp time buy back and personal day buy back during the last thirty -six (36) months of hisher employment.

After Retirement Eligibility Upon the death of a member who is retired or eligible for retirement the surviving spouse will receive 5 percent of the amount the Participant was receiving or entitled to receive payable for life. For members Killed in Service the surviving spouse will receive a benefit equal to 1 percent of the participants salary as of the date of death payable for life. In the event of the spouses death the Participants dependent children will share the benefit equally until age 18 or age 23 if attending college.

Police Officers who have completed at least twelve (12) years of total police service for the Township shall be entitled to vest their retirement benefits in accordance with Resolution No.

82-26 adopted December 8 1982.

The social security offset of the Police Officers pension is eliminated with the 1989 contract.

The Township agrees that the officer will receive hisher full amount of pension due both prior to and after the officer becomes entitled to Social Security Benefits. All actuarial studies will be made available to the Police Wage and Policy Unit. A representative of the Wage and Policy Unit shall be included in any meetings related to pension fund matters.

Beginning in the year 2 each Police Officer will contribute five percent (5) of hisher actual earnings to the pension fund. During the 2 contract year upon completion of an actuarial study a pension re-opener will occur to explore the feasibility of eliminating the said five percent (5).

Service Related Disability Provisions The Pension Plan shall include a provision for a service-related disability. Resolution 98-29 amends the Police Pension Plan Document (Resolution 92-36) which provides the necessary language to fulfill this requirement.

As of January 1 22 the pension benefit shall include a cost of living adjustment (COLA) for qualified personnel in accordance with Act 6. This total benefit is not to exceed 65 of the average salary used to compute the retirement benefit. The plan shall provide an annual increase ofretiree benefits based on but not to exceed the annual change in the Consumer Price Index. It is agreed upon by the members of the wage and policy unit that an additional 2.5 pension contribution may be needed to support the pension fund.

foe The .ageanEi po1ieuait as ell as HteBeafti aSttf)eFi!ieH1 agtee to a feasiett heacfihe epe1te1Lwitfttn.

tJtetem ef tl.ltteontfflet.  As a result of the re-opener held August 14 22 the Board of Supervisors agree to an increase of the COLA benefit from 65 to 75 of the average salary used to compute the retirement benefit. This change shall take place following the first sound actuarial study after January I 24.

 ARTICLE XXI - PAST POLICIESAND PRACTICES  Any and all benefits herein and before provided by the Township of Findlay and not specifically mentioned above shall be continued in full force and effect without abatement.

 16  . . .

   ARTICLE XXII - PAY DAYS  Paydays shall be every other Friday.

 ARTICLEXXIII - BEREAVEMENTLEAVE  Upon the death of a Police Officers spouse child grandchild mother father sister brother mother-in-law father-in-law sister-in-law brother-in-law grandmother or grandfather each bargaining unit employee shall be accorded a five (5) day leave of absence from work with no loss of pay.

The affected Police Officer shall have the sole right to determine when his leave period will commence provided (1) that any such period consist ofno more than five (5) consecutive calendar days and (2) that the funeral or interment of the deceased relative occur on the second or third day of that period under these provisions.

 ARTICLEXXIV - AMMUNITION  The Township shall provide ammunition to Police Officers for firearms training directed by the Chief of Police or required by law also ammunition for duty.

 ARTICLE XXV - EDUCATIONINCENTIVE  A. Any Police Officer having a college degree in any Criminal Justice related field will be compensated on his or her full time anniversary hire date according to the following scale Associate Degree - 1.5 of base pay Bachelors Degree - 2. of base pay Masters Degree - 2.5 of base pay  B. Any Police Officer who has served in the United States military will be compensated on his or her full time anniversary hire date according to the following scale Up to 4 years active duty 1.5 of base pay or  17    6 or more years reserve duty 4 or more years active 2. of base pay duty No combination of reserve and active duty years will be considered when determining military incentive (Police Officer would choose either Active Duty years or Reserve years). Also eligible Police Officers can only receive one incentive (Police Officer would choose either the Military or Education Incentive). The Police Officers DD214 form must show proof of an honorable discharge in order to receive this incentive.

C. Any Police Officer continuing his education in college courses related to the Criminal Justice Field or required by the Institution to achieve a degree in a Criminal Justice related field will be reimbursed for all class related expenses not to exceed one-thousand dollars ($1) per semester. In order for the reimbursement to take place the Police Officer must maintain a two point zero (2.) or C grade point average in each of the coursecourses attended.

D. Any Police Officer who receives funds for continuing education agrees to remain in the employment of Findlay Township for a period of four (4) years following the most recent funding. If the Police Officer terminates his employment prior to the four (4) year period the Police Officer agrees to repay the Township for the amount of funding received or a proportional basis. (Example An officer receiving ($85) in Januay of 1999 who resigned in January of 21 would be required to repay ($425) or 5 of the funding received due to the fact the officer remained for two years of the four required years. The Police Officer will only be responsible to repay any funding that falls within the four (4) year agreemel1f.) E. The Chief of police will have the discretion to determine if the degree or course meets the requirements of a Criminal Justice Related field.

 ARTICLE XXVI-PROBATIONARY  PATROL OFFICERS  A. Any Probationary Patrol Officer (as defined in Article 17 of the Findlay Township Police Department Rules and Regulations) resigning his position within one (1) year of employment without the recommendation of the Chief of Police shall be responsible to reimburse the township for the entire cost of hisher training. This shall include but not be limited to all salaries associated with both the probationary officer and the training officer on the training period any associated expenses incurred by the township while the probationary officer is enrolled in a training academy and any equipment or uniforms issued to the Probationary Patrol Officer.

 ARTICLE XVII - CALEA CLAUSE  The Township must provide all necessary requirements and essential funds manpower equipment and supplies to maintain compliance with the standards promulgated by the Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement Agencies (CALEA) that are applicable to  18    I        -  I  provided they adhere to policy and provides for proper training and equipment that may save the life of a citizen andor a Police Officer.

 ARTICLE XXVIII- INVALIDATION CLAUSE  Any invalidation of any single clause contained in this contract does not invalidate the entire contract only the clause or clauses affected.

 19  .

 In WITNESS WHEREOF and intending to be legally bound hereby the parties have set their hands and seals this  Qtn.

 day of )  ATTEST     2 l   TOWNSHIP OF FINDLAY  WITNESS  FINDLAY TOWNSHIP POLICE DEPARTMENT WAGE AND POLICY UNIT  .

 Sergeant Thomas Downing Chaiirnan  .

 2  .

   .

   AGREEMENT The Township of Findlay and the Findlay Township Police Department Wage and Policy Unit agree that Police Officers and part-time officers (if and when they are made Police Officers) who are hired before September I 216 are eligible for retiree medical benefits under these conditions Police Officers who retire with twenty-five (25) years of service after 1994 shall receive a paid Premium Health Care Hospitalization Plan equal to the Health Care Plan that was in effect at the time the officer retired. The municipality shall pay the percentage of the cost of the plan that was in effect at the time the officer retired for both the retiring officer and spouse. The benefit shall be provided until the death of each benefactor. This benefit is only granted to the officers spouse as long as the retired officer and spouse remain married. In the event of divorce the retired officers spouse is no longer eligible to receive this benefit. In the event the retired officer dies prior to his or her spouse the spouse shall continue to receive the benefit.

In WITNESS WHEREOF and intending to be legally bound hereby the parties have set their hands and seals this ATTEST  qtt.

 day of  fuovuYClU-   2 Jk..

 TOWNSHIP OF FINDLAY  WITNESS  cX  FINDLAY TOWNSHIP POLICE DEPARTMENT WAGE AND POLICY UNIT  TD Sergeant Thomas Downing Chai.iln  
