AGREEMENT  Between Brentwood Borough and Teamsters Local Union No 25 representing the Police Depa1irnent Employees January 1 216 through December 31 219 Adopted via Resolution No. 216-49 August 23 216  INDEX TO AGREEMENT  ARTICLE  PAGE  Police Ofiicers Covered by This Agreement .

1 II  Terms of AgreementDuration .

1  III  Agreements .

1  IV  Base Annual Salary of Sergeants and Lieutenants .

I  V  Base Annual Salary of Police Officers .

2  VI  Longevity .

3  Vll  Hours of Work and Scheduling .

3  VIII  Extra Compensation for Overtime Work .

5  IX  Court Appearances .

7  X  Residency .

8  XI  Holidays .

8  Xll  Personal Days .

8  Xlll  Vacations .

9  XIV  Senior Officers Pay .

1  xv  Clothing Allowance .

1  XVI  Bereavement Leave .

11  XVII  Education Base Pay Increment .

11  XVIII  Personal Vehicle Use .

12  XIX  Solicitation of Funds .

12  xx  Grievance Procedure .

12  XXI  Drng and Substance Abuse   XXII  Sexual Harassment Policy .

18  XXIII  Health Insurance .

19  XXIV  Optical Benefits .

21  XXV  Dental Benefits .

21  XXVI  Life lnsurance .

21  XXVII  Disability Benefits . 22  xxvm  Death Benefits .

22  XXIX  Retirement Pay .

23  XXX  Hospitalization After Retircment .

23  XXXI  Physical Examination .

 24  XXXII  Police Pension and Death Benefit Plan .

24  XXXIII  Pension Benefit and Contribution .

24  XXXIV  Pension Fund Evaluation   XXXV  Layoff and Reduction of Work Force .

25  XXXVI  Verification of False AtTest Insurance .

25  XXXVII  Police Officer Bill of Rights . 26  XXXVIII  Dues Check Off and Fair Share Fee .

27  XXXIX  Sick Leave Policy - Disability .

27  XL  Team Legal .

28  XLI  Traumatic lncidcnt   .

  5  .

25  .L.78  XLII  Light Duty Policy .

28  XLIII  Subcontracting .

 XLIV  Drive Authorization and Deduction . 29  XLV  Probationary Police Officers .

 29  XLVI  Canine Police Ofiicer .

 3  XLVII  Part-Time Police Officers . 3  XLVIII  Duration .

31  28  Exhibits Exhibit A  K-9 Atreement  ARTICLE I POLICE OFFICERS COVERED BY THIS AGREEMENT 111isAgreement shall govern the terms and conditions of employment of all full-time and regular parttime police- officers including but not limited to lieutenants sergeants and patrolmen and excluding the chief of police and any other management level employees as certified by the Pennsylvania Labor Relation Board on December 11 1996 at PF-R-1-73-W.

 ARTICLE II TERMS OF AGREEMENTDURATION Pursuant to the requirements of Act 111 of 1986 this agreement shall be binding upon the parties hereto their successors and assigns from January 1 216 to and including December 31 219 and thereafter from year to year except that either party may notify the other by certified mail on or before July 1st of219 its desire to modify or tenninatc this Agreement.

 ARTICLE III AGREEMENTS All previous benefits shall remain in force from the previous years except as changed or revised herein.

 ARTICLE IV BASE ANNUAL SALARY OF LIEUTENANTS AND SERGEANTS A.

 Lieutenants shall receive a basic annual compensation at the rate of five percent (5) above the rate prescribed for Sergeants.

 B.

 foe Borough of Brentwood shall have exclusive discetion to create any Lieutenant or Sergeant positions or to fill any vacancies which arise in such positions. In the exercise of this discretion the Borough of Brentwood shall not be required to create any position nor shall it be required to fill any vacancy which may come into existence in the positions of Sergeant or Lieutenant. In the event that the Borough of Brentwood shall elect to create andor fill vacancies in a Sergeant andor Lieutenant position the person filling such position andor vacancy shall in the case of Sergeants have a minimum of five (5) years police experience with the Borough of Brentwood Police Department and in the case of Lieutenants have at least ten (IO years of Police experience with the Borough of Brentwood Police Department.

 ARTICLE V BASE ANNUAL SALARY OF POLICE OFFICERS This agreement shall apply to all foll-time Civil Service Police Officers hired by the Borough of Brentwood after January I 1999. This article is in full effect but subject to Senior Officers Pay set forth in Article XIV.

A  B.

 C.

 A patrol officers base foll-time wage rate (currently $79956) will be increased as follows effective January I of each year January 1 216  3.

 $82354.68  $39.59Hr  January 1 217  3.

 $84825.32  $4.78Hr  January 1 218  3.

 $8737.8  $42.Hr  January 1 219  3.

 $89991.18  $43.26Hr  A Sergeants foll-time base rate (cun-ently $83953.81) will be increased as follows effective January I of each year January l 216  3.

 $86472.42  $41.57Hr  January I 217  3.

 $8966.59  $42.82Hr  January l 218  3.

 $91738.59  $44.11Hr  January 2 219  3.

 $9449.75  $45.43Hr  Police officers hired after January 1 216 shall be paid on the following schedule st  1 year  6 of prevailing base rate  2 nd year  65 of prevailing base rate  3d year  7 of prevailing base rate  4 th year  75 of prevailing base rate  5 th year  8 of prevailing base rate  th  85 of prevailing base rate  th  9 of prevailing base rate  8 year  th  95 of prevailing base rate  9 th year  1 of prevailing base rate  6 year  7 year  2 I .p  - l   ARTICLE VI LONGEVITY After five (5) years of continuous full time employment by the Borough of Brentwood a police officer shall be entitled to additional compensation payable semi-monthly as follows 5-1 years  3 of hisher base annual salary  I -15 years  4 of hisher base annual salary  15-2 years  5 of hisher base annual salary  More than 2 years  6 of hisher base annual salary  Full-Time Police Officers hired on January I 212 or thereafter shall not be entitled to longevity pay.

 ARTICLE VII HOURS OF VORK AND SCHEDULING A.

 HOURS OF WORK A police officer in consideration of payment of base annual salary and additional compensation for continuous service shall work as defined by the Borough of Brentwood and the proper officials thereof at least eighty (8) hours in a pay period.

For the purpose of this section a week is defined as seven (7) consecutive days beginning at 1 A.M. on a Sunday and ending at 12 midnight on the following Saturday prevailing time. A pay period is defined as two (2) consecutive weeks.

 B.

 SCHEDULING Scheduling ofofficers hours of work shall take place according to the following procedure utilizing the number of officers that are employed by the Borough at any given time.

This scheduling procedure does not establish a minimum number of Police Officers that the Borough shall maintain at any given time  I.

 All officers covered by this Agreement shall be divided into teams of four (4) officers each plus from one (I) to three (3) remainder officers. All officers included in teams shall work on traditional shifts of daylight (7 a.m. to 3 p.m.) afternoon (3 p.m. to 11 p.m.) and evening (11 p.m. to 7 a.m.) work. Remainder officers shall work one of two (2) nontraditional shifts (11 a.m. to 7 p.m. and 7 p.m. to 3 a.m.) unless otherwise  agreed to by the Borough of Brentwood and a majority of the bargaining unit.

Each of the above traditional shifts may include an early officer shift which will require the officer to begin said shift one (1) hour earlier. (e.g. the early officer for the 7 a.m. to 3 p.m. traditional shift will work from 6 a.m. to 2 p.m.) at the discretion of the Chief of Police. The early officer cannot be a shift supervisor (Sergeant or O.1.C.) unless agreed to by the Chief of Police and Sergeant or O.1.C.

A revision to the current schedule may be implemented for a term of no less than six (6) months only if approved by the Mayor and a majority of members of the Bargaining Unit (defined as fifty percent plus two (5  2)) are in agreement.

 2.

 Assignment of officers to shifts shall be through bidding based on seniority. Seniority shall be based on the most recent date of hire.

Shifts shall be assigned for a three (3) month period. A schedule for each three (3) month period shall be developed and printed at least one (I) month in advance of the schedule taking effect. The schedule shall establish a predetennined cycle of days working and days off which shall consist of 7 days on 2 days off 6 days on 2 days off 7 days on 4 days off unless otherwise agreed to by the bargaining unit. All scheduled work weeks shall be followed by at least (2) consecutive days off.

Scheduling of weekend days off (Saturday and Sunday) shall be rotated equitably among all officers who are covered by this Agreement.

 3.

 All police sergeants shall work a traditional shift and each sergeant shall work a different shift. Shifts shall be through bidding based on the promotion seniority as determined by the date when the officer was promoted to the rank of sergeant.

 4.

 The schedule shall be arranged as to minimize overtime particularly from court appearance. With the approval of the Chief of Police or the officer in charge for each shift overtime obligations to an officer may be fulfilled through compensatory time off provided that such an arrangement does not result in increased overtime.

 5.

 (a) All work schedules may be changed with the consent of the Chief of Police and the officers involved. In the event of a state of emergency within the Borough the Chief of Police may change the schedule within his reasonable discretion. In the case of a Special Event the Chief of Police may change the schedule within his reasonable discretion within 72 hours notice to all officers involved in the change. Special Events are limited to the Fourth of July Light-Up Night and no more than three (3) other designated Borough events so determined by a majority vote of the Brentwood Borough Council. Other than the Fourth of July any  officer who is already scheduled for hisher four (4) consecutive pass days as identified in Section 2 above shall be excluded from having their schedule changed.

(b) In addition to the shift changes permitted in Section 5(a) above the Borough shall have the right to reassign an officer whenever there is an officer who is or is expected to be absent for one ( 1) week or more due to vacation illness injury or other circumstances requiring absence from work to fill any day of the absent officers shift as needed. The officer to be reassigned will start from the non-traditional shift(s) starting with the least senior patrol officer. If a non-traditional shift is not staffed or  a non-traditional officer is on vacation or legitimately unavailable the officer to be reassigned will be the least senior patrol officer provided however that this shall rotate between the five (5) least senior officers.

The officer reassigned shall not be responsible for working his original shift while reassigned. The officer reassigned shall have two consecutive days off In the event the officer to be reassigned is schedule for vacation or is otherwise legitimately unavailable the Borough shall move to the next employee in the rotation in reverse order of seniority until one who is capable of filling the absence is reassigned. Only if none of the five (5)  least senior officers are capable of filling the above shall the Chief reassign someone other than one of the five (5) least senior officers and then only in reverse order of seniority and only for so long as is necessary until one of the five (5) least senior is available to cover the absence.

 ARTICLE VIII EXTRA COMPENSATION FOR OVERTIME VORK A.

 All police officers shall be paid one and one half ( 1 ) times their base hourly rate for all time in excess of eight (8) hours in a twenty-four (24) period. Exceptions are shift changes and court time which are covered by other sections of this Agreement.

 B.

 An officer called out to work overtime shall be paid for a minimum of four (4) hours work unless the officer agrees in writing to work less time and to waive hisher rights to four (4) hours of overtime compensation Tius provision does not apply to an officer whose shift extends into overtime.

 C.

 In lieu of overtime pay police officers shall be entitled to accrue not more than thirtysix (36) hours compensatory time for hours worked calculated at the rate of 1-12 hours of compensatory time for each overtime hour worked. Once a police officer reaches his maximum accrual of thirty-six (36) hours of compensatory time heshe shall no longer be able to accrue compensatory time but rather shall be paid 1-12 times for all  ove1iime hours worked. All police officers who have accrned compensatory time shall be pennitted to use such time within a reasonable period after making the request of the Borough if the use of compensatory time does not unduly disrnpt the operations of the Borough Police Department otherwise such compensatory time shall be used at the first reasonable opportunity that the use of compensatory time does not unduly disrnpt the operations of the Police Department. Compensatory time shall not be carried over st from year to year. All unused compensatory time remaining December 31 of th any given year will be reimbursed to the employee by January l 5 in a lump sum payment at the previous years hourly rate.

D.

 Opportunities to work overtime shall be scheduled in a consistent manner. An overtime opportunity is defined as an ove1iime work period of four (4) hours or more except those assignment which require special skill or training or require the presence of a specific officer to handle a matter assigned to that officer.

1.

 A roster shall be kept showing the assignment of all ove1iime shifts. Officers will be listed on this roster according to their seniority.

 11.

 When an ove1iime oppmiunity exists it will be filled by contacting the officer on the roster next available to work. If an officer who is next on the roster list is inadvertently skipped over for an overtime detail said officer will be placed back in the rotation as first up for the next overtime detail.

 111.

 The person contacting the officer will call the telephone munbers and pager numbers filed by the officer with the Department. Each officer will be responsible for providing the Department with up-to-date numbers  1v.

 A reasonable amount of time shall be allowed to contact an officer before contacting the next Officer on the roster. If the ove1iime requested needs to occur within four (4) hours of the request a fifteen (15) minute response time will be allowed. A thi.Iiy(3) minute response ti.Incwill be provided if the overtime work period is four (4) to twenty-four (24) hours away from the request time. If the overti.Ine work is more than twenty- four (24) hours in the future the responsibility for scheduling the overtime will be perfonned by the OIC on the next shift.

 v.

 If an officer does not respond within the ti.Inesset forth above or declines the opportunity to work the next opportunity to work overtime will go to the next officers on the list.

 ARTICLE IX COURT APPEARANCES A  In the event any full-time police officers are required to appear in Magisterial District Court pursuant to hisher duties and such appearance occurs during hisher time off hours the full-time police officer shall receive four (4) hours of pay at the individuals overtime rate.

 B.

 In the event any full-time police officer is required to appear in Pretrial Criminal Comi Juvenile Court Statutory Appeals and Civil Corni and such appearance occurs during hisher time off hours the full-time police officer shall receive a minimum of four (4) hours of pay at the overtime rate plus pay at the individuals ove1iimc rate for all time spent in excess of the four (4) hour minimum.

 C.

 If a full-time police officer is on duty and required to appear in Criminal Juvenile Appeals Pretrial and Civil Court heshe shall receive fifteen ($15 ) dollars extra pay for each day of appearance  D.

 A full-time police officer who incurs parking expenses for appearances encompassed by this Article whether on duty or off duty shall be reimbursed by the Borough for such court expense.

 E.

 A full-time police officer may not be pennitted to work a daylight overtime shift on a day when they are also scheduled to appear in court excluding magistrate court.

 F.

 The Chief of Police shall contact any Police Officer for which he received a subpoena to appear in court so that it can be ascertained as to how many Police Officers will be required in court to successfully effect the prosecution in question. Likewise should a Police Officer receive a subpoena to appear in court they shall first contact the Chief of Police so that it can be ascertained as to how many Police Officers will be required in court to successfully effect the prosecution in question. The Chief of Police will then contact the issuing authority in order to obtain approval to only send those officers needed. If an Officer is relieved of his required court appearance then the Chief of Police shall notify that officer in writing as soon after that his presence is not required. This will be the only acceptable procedure employed for payroll purposes.

 G.

 In the event any full-time police officer is required to appear in more than one (1) Court proceeding on the same date and such appearances are equal to or are within one hundred and twenty (12) minutes of the scheduled start time then said officer shall only receive the four (4) hours of pay at the individuals overtime rate.

If the multiple Court proceedings including a maximum of l hour for travel should exceed four (4) hours then said officer shall receive pay at the individuals overtime rate for all time spent in excess of the four (4) hours.

 ARTICLEX RESIDENCY All full-time officers shall be required to reside within ten ( 1) air miles from the Borough Building.

This will not apply to any present part-time officer hired to work on a full-time basis.

 ARTICLE XI HOLIDAYS Each full-time police officer shall receive the following nine (9) paid holidays in each calendar year New Years Day Easter Memorial Day July 4th Labor Day Columbus Day Veterans Day Thanksgiving and Christmas.

Any full-time police officer working on a shift that begins on the holiday including the 11 p.m. split-shift shall be paid at a rate of time and a half for the full eight (8) hours.

 ARTICLE XII PERSONAL DAYS Each full-time police ofiicer shall annually receive six (6) personal days and an officer shall be able to utilize such personal days anytime heshe wishes so long as the use of such personal days does not necessitate overtime or create a manpower shortage and emergency for the Borough.

Officers shall be permitted to utilize personal days in four (4) hour increments. Should a police officer not be able to take hisher personal days during a calendar year then such police officer shall be paid for personal days not taken.

Full-Time Police Officers hired on January 1 212 or thereafter shall annually receive four (4) personal days for each year up until they have completed five (5) years of service after which they shall annually receive six (6) personal days for each year thereafter. An officer shall be able to utilize such personal days anytime heshe wishes so long as the use of such personal days does not necessitate overtime or create a manpower shortage and emergency for the Borough.

Officers shall be permitted to utilize personal days in four (4) hour increments. Should a police officer not be able to take hisher personal days during a calendar year then such police officer shall be paid for personal days not taken.

 ARTICLE XIII VACATIONS Full-time police ofiicers shall be entitled to a vacation from employment with base annual salary and hisher additional compensation for continuous service. Each week consists of five (5) days as follows After I year  2 weeks  After 5 years  3 weeks  After 1 years  4 weeks  After 15 years  5 weeks  After 2 years  6 weeks  All vacations shall be approved by the Borough of Brentwood through the Chief of Police thereof as to scheduling. Vacations may be scheduled throughout the calendar year except that single vacation days that require overtime pay will not be approved. Officers with less than I 5 years with the Brentwood Police Department are allowed to use up to two (2) weeks of vacation i.e. ten (1) days as single days offs which may also be taken in 4 hour increments.

Officers that have completed 15 years of service with the Brentwood Police Department are allowed to use up to three (3) weeks of vacation i.e. fifteen (15) days as single days off which may also be taken in 4 hour increments. All other weeks of vacation must be taken in a mimum of one (1) week. i.e. five (5) consecutive days increments at a given time.

Full-Time Police Officers hired on January 1 212 or thereafter shall be entitled to a vacation from employment with base annual salary and hisher additional compensation for continuous service as follows After I year  2 weeks  After 5 years  3 weeks  After 1 years  4 weeks  After 15 years  5 weeks  ARTICLE XIV SENIOR OFFICERS PAY  On any shift where neither the Lieutenant or Sergeant is on duty the senior police officer working said shift other than desk duty shall be paid at Sergeants rate of pay for said shift only upon the institution of the rank of Sergeant. The aforementioned difference between patrol officers and sergeants rate for OIC pay shall be in addition to the patrol officers regular longevity rate of pay for all hours worked as an OIC.

ARTICLE XV CLOTHING ALLOWANCE  The unifonn to be worn by police officers shall be prescribed by the Borough of Brentwood or the proper officials thereof. Each police officer shall be entitled to an allowance towards the purchase and cleaning of their unifonn in the amount of$9 per year for actual verified clothing purchases.

Payment of the clothing allowance or any portion thereof will be either paid by the Borough to the police officer upon receipt by the Borough of written verification of the purchase or paid by the Borough directly to the vendor upon receipt by the Borough of written verification from the police officer of the purchase or order. In lieu of submitting paid invoices for reimbursement to the Borough or submitting invoices to the Borough for direct payment to the vendor the police officer may choose to purchase clothing with vendors with whom the Borough is able to submit a purchase order invoice provided the amount of the invoice does not exceed the clothing allowance then remaining for the police officer. The clothing allowance may be used to purchase all clothing and unifonn equipment as identified in the Boroughs Police Uniform Policy.

Also any unifom1 damaged while on duty will be replaced or repaired by the Borough over and above the Uniform Allowance with approval by the Chief of Police. In addition the Borough will replace if required the external vest of any officer.

Full-Time Officers terminating their employment with the Borough are entitled to keep any items purchased with their annual clothing allowance but will return all items supplied to them by the Borough e.g. laser radio etc. An inventory of equipment provided to each officer shall be maintained by the Chief of Police. However any officer who purchased a fire ann or weapon with hisher clothing allowance must remain employed by the Borough for one calendar year from the date of purchase or else will be required to return the fire ann or weapon to the Borough or reimburse the Borough for the actual purchase price on tennination of employment. The Borough will pay any transfer or other fees necessary to complete transfer of ownership from the departing officer to the Borough. An officer remaining employed beyond one year from the purchase of a fireann or weapon may keep the weapon upon tennination of his employment.

The Borough of Brentwood will replace Ballistic Vests in a sum up to $15 every five (5) years or in compliance with the expiration date of the Ballistic Vest. In order to qualify every five (5) years for a replacement vest the officer must surrender any and all vests which have been issued to him by the Borough.

Probationary police officers are not entitled to the clothing allowance. Refer to Article XXXXV.

 ARTICLE XVI BEREAVEMENT LEA VE I.

 The full-time officer shall be entitled to the following paid bereavement leave Employee (a)  Five (5) days in the event of the death of the following persons Spouse Parent or Child(ren).

 (b)  Three (3) days in the event of the death of the following persons Brother Sister Father-in-Law Mother-in-Law or legal guardian.

 (c)  One( I) day in the event of the death of the following persons Grandparent Uncle Aunt Niece Nephew Brother-in-Law or Sister-in-Law.

 II.

 The period during which an employee may utilize his or her paid bereavement leave shall be no earlier than (and including) the date of death of the named relative and no later than (and including) the day following the funeral of the named relative.

 III.

 Weekends Holidays and days on which the employee is not scheduled to work shall not be considered in the computation of bereavement leave days set forth in paragraph II.

 ARTICLE XVII EDUCATIONAL BASE PAY INCREMENT Any police officer hired prior to January 1 212 will be entitled to the following educational base pay increment. Any Brentwood police officer attending and successfully completing a course of law enforcement training or related training that has been pre-approved by the Mayor and Council shall be entitled to a base pay increase of $25. per month commencing the first month after successful completion of such training providing that no police officer shall be entitled to be paid said base pay increase unless A.

 The police officer first makes written application to the Mayor and to Borough Council for approval to receive said base pay increase and  B.

 Tl1eMayor rec1mnendsin writing to Borough Council the subsequent approval of the base pay increase and  11 I    C c  C  Prior to the Police Officers attending such training Borough Council has approved the base pay increase by fonnal motion of Council duly adopted by majority vote of the members of Council present at a regular public meeting at which a quorum is present and  D.

 The police officers submits to the Mayor and to Council documentary proof of successful completion of said training.

 E.

 In order to resolve any potential problems covering educational benefits it is emphasized that the pre-approval requirements must be satisfied.

 A police officer will be paid an additional $3. per year for an Associates Degree.

An officer who has a B.A. degree will be paid S5. per year.

 ARTICLE XVIII PERSONAL VEHICLE USE Any police officer who uses hisher personal vehicle for any duty related purpose shall be reimbursed for the mileage incurred in accordance with the Federal Tax Guidelines as set by Council Resolution. Said t1ips must be authorized andor pre-approved by the Borough of Brentwood.

 ARTICLE XIX SOLICITATION OF FUNDS No police officer shall solicit or collect funds from any business establishment or any resident of the Borough of Brentwood.

 ARTICLE XX GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE A.

 The parties shall observe and be bound by Public Law 118.3 of 1947 relating to strikes by public employees. (43 P .S 215. l et seq.). During the tenn of this Agreement there shall be no lockouts. 111ereshall be no strikes work stoppages interruption or impeding of work or concerted absences from work. No officer board member ll representative of the Union shall authorize instigate aid or condone any such activities. 111e applicable procedure of this Agreement shall be followed for the settlement of all grievances.

 12  I  r    B.

 Definitions Grievance -A  2 3  C  grievance is hereby defined as  A complaint by an employee regarding the interpretation or application of or compliance with this A 6reement.

A complaint by the Union where the Union as a party is affected regarding interpretation or application of or compliance with this Agreement.

Any disciplinary action that resulted in a written document to the Police Officers Personnel file.

 Procedure  Step 1- Chief Any employee who believes that heshe has a justifiable complaint shall submit a written and signed grievance to the Chief within then ( 1) days after the occurrence of the event giving rise the grievance or within ten ( 1) days after the employee knew or reasonably should have known of the event giving rise to the grievance.

ll1e Chief shall have the authority to settle the grievance Heshe will meet with the Grievant andor hisher Union Steward to discuss the grievance and will respond thereto in writing within ten ( 1) days of hisher having received it. If the Chiefs decision is not appealed the grievance shall be considered settled on the basis of the decision last made and shall not be eligible for further appeal. If the Chief does not respond within ten (1) days the grievance shall automatically be deemed denied and proceed to the next step of the grievance procedure.

 Step 2 - Mayor If the grievance is not satisfactorily resolved in Step 1 it may be appealed to Step 2 level. A grievance to be considered beyond Step 1 however must be appealed in writing by the Union to the Mayor within ten ( 1) days of the Chiefs Step I decision.

In Step 2 the Unions Business Agent and the Mayor shall meet and discuss such grievance following receipt of the written appeal at a meeting to be scheduled for such purpose. Such Grievances will be discussed and answered by the Mayor within ten (I ) days after they are received therefore on appeal.

The Mayor shall have the authority to settle the grievance. The decision of the Mayor and the date thereof shall be recorded on the Grievance Fonn with a copy given to the aggrieved employee and hisher Union Business Agent. If the Mayor does not respond within ten ( 1) days the grievance shall automatically be deemed denied and proceed to the next step of the grievance procedure.

 Step 3 - Borough Council If a grievance is not satisfactory resolved in Step 2 it may be appealed to the Step 3 level. A Grievance to be considered beyond Step 2 however must be appealed in writing by the Union within ten (1) days of the Mayors Step 2 decision.

In Step 3 the Unions Business Agent and the Borough Council or their designee shall discuss such grievance following receipt of the written appeal at a meeting to be scheduled for  such purpose. Grievances discussed in such meeting shall be answered by the Borough Council or their designee in writing within ten (I ) days after the day of such meeting unless a different date is agreed upon by the parties. If the Borough Council or their designee does not respond within ten (I ) days the bTievance shall automatically be deemed denied and proceed to the next step of the grievance procedure .

 Step 4 -  Arbitration  1. Any grievance which has been processed in accordance with the provisions of this Section but which has not been satisfactorily resolved may upon proper appeal be submitted to arbitration before an impartial arbitrator to be selected by mutual agreement of the paiiies. If within ten ( I ) workdays (or any longer period mutually abteed upon) after receipt of any proper appeal the parties are unable to ab!eeupon an Arbitrator the American Arbitrator Association shall be requested to submit the name of nine (9) disinterested persons qualified and willing to act as Jmpmiial Arbitrator From such list the Union and the Borough shall strike one name until eight (8) names have been eliminated.

The person whose name remains on the list shall be selected as the impartial arbitrator  2. The Arbitrator shall be requested to submit his decision in writing within thirty (3) days after the conclusion of the heaiing or hearings (andor receipt of any trai1scriptandor briefs thereof) and the decision of the Arbitrator so rendered shall be final and binding upon the employee involved and upon the parties to this Agreement. Where a dispute relates to the scale of wages or benefits in any way any decision rendered shall not be made retroactive for more than thirty (3) days beyond the date on which the dispute first was presented in writing as a grievance. The fees and expenses of Arbitration shall be borne in equal shares by the Borough and the Union. 1l1e Arbitrator shall not have the right to add to subtract from modify or disregard any of the tenns or provisions of the Abreement.

D. Time Limits The time limits set forth in this Article are business days.

 ARTICLEXXI DRUG AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE POLICY Policy The Brentwood Borough has a legal responsibility and management obligation to ensure a safe work environment as well as paramount interest in protecting the public by ensuring that its officers have the physical stamina and emotional stability to perfonn their assigned duties.

TI1e abuse of drugsalcohol or chemical substances is illegal and counter-productive to the good order and reputation of the Police Depaitment and will not be tolerated. Officers must have physical coordination and unimpaired judgment to react prudently and effectively to the demands of police service.

 Purpose This order states Police Department Policy relative to the use of narcotics illegal drugs alcohol and the abuse of legally prescribed drugs by any member of the Brentwood Police Department and sets forth conditions in which drug and alcohol tests will be required.

 Definitions A.

 The term drug includes alcohol cannabis narcotics or controlled substances as defined under the Pennsylvania Crime Code Controlled Substance Drug Device and Cosmetic Act.

 B.

 The tenn drug abuse includes the use of alcohol cannabis narcotics or any controlled substai1cewhich has not been legally presc1ibed andor dispensed or the abuse of a legal!y prescribed drug.

 C.

 Reasonable Suspicion Standard is an apparent state of facts andor circumstances found to exist by a supervisor which would cause a reasonably intelligent person to believe the employee to be under the influence or a user of alcohol drugs or narcotics. The standard of reasonable suspicion is less than probable cause.

 General Rules A.

 The use of illegal drugs alcohol cannabis or non-prescribed controlled substances or the abuse oflegally prescribed drugs or controlled substa11cesby a member of the Brentwood Police Department is strictly prohibited.

 B.

 Refusal by a police officer to take the required drug or alcohol test shall be considered insubordination a11dwill result in the immediate relief from hisher duties pending disposition of any administration action. The officer will be ordered to take a medical examination.

The department upon notification of the refusal of a police officer to take the medical examination shall mark the officer as absent without permission.

 1s I   C.

 Police Officers who appear under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance for work may be subject to immediate fitness-for-duty examination at the Employers designated medical facility. Such fitness-for-duty examination shall be administered only after the Police Chief Police Officer-in-Charge or Borough Manager agrees the individual appears unfit for work.

 D.

 Police Officers are encouraged to request assistance through the Employers Medical Insurance Coverage Program. Medical benefits will be provided as specified in Employers Plan.

 E.

 The Employer will secure drug testing for all new job applicants.

 F.

 The use of alcohol or drugs during working hours or repmiing to work under the influence of alcohol or drugs will not be tolerated. In addition the abuse of alcohol or drugs at any time on duty could jeopardize employment with the Borough.

 Mandatory Drug Testing  Mandatory drug testing is the submission of a urine specimenblood sample in order to test such samples for the presence of drugs.

Mandatory drug and alcohol analysis will be conducted only upon the approval of a chief of police or pursuant to Civil Service regulations under the following circumstances 1. Based upon Reasonable Suspicion citing specific instances when a member was incapable of perfonning his or her required duties or exhibited unusual work perfonnance measures andor behavioral traits.

2. At any time during the probationary  period  3. For counseling assistance programs or as conditions of discipline due to prior drug or alcohol abuse.

4. Prior to assignment with any special units i.e. including any Drug Suppression General Drug Task Force Special Weapons and Tactics (SWAT) the Bomb Disposal Unit and the Evidence Room.

5. Random testing twice each year for personnel assigned to special units as listed above.

6. When an officer is scheduled for physical examination to return to duty after absence of 15 days or more which nonnally requires physical examination and the officer has a record of excessive absenteeism.

7. When an officer is involved in an on-duty motor vehicle accident.

 16 j    Procedures for Ordering of DrugAlcohol Testing in Cases of Reasonable Suspicion I.

 A ranking officer will be notified by the initiating supervisor of the circumstances leading to the request for a dru!ialcohol test.

 2.

 If the request for a dru!ialcohol test is approved the supervisor requesting the test will contact the chief of police immediately indicating the circumstances of reasonable suspicion which fonned the basis of the request. If the chief of police is not available the supervising officer will order the test immediately. If the basis for the request includes an infraction of the Rules and Regulations a Disciplinary Action Report (DAR) will accompany the request.

 3.

 The memo will then be presented to the accused officer who will sign his or her name to the bottom of the report indicating that they have read it. 111-issignature will in no way be considered an admission of guilt but only an acknowledgment of the fact that the report was read. A copy of this report will be given to the accused officer.

 4.

 An accused officer who refuses to submit to a properly required drug alcohol test shall be deemed insubordinate and charges shall be prefon-ed by the requesting supervisor or other commanding officer and the accused officer will be transported home.

 5.

 If the accused officer agrees to take the druwalcohol test the officer shall complete and sign the dru!ialcohol testing consent fonn the supervisor shall read it to the officer. The yellow copy of the consent form will be given to the accused officer. TI1e supervisor will retain the white copy of the consent fonn.

 6.

 A supervisor will transport the accused officer to the approved testing facility and will stand by until the test has been administered and will then transpmi the office home. At the testing facility the supervisor shall complete and sign the laboratory request for the drugalcohol test indicating the name of the accused officer to be tested and the telephone number of the chief of police or his designee who is the person to be contacted when the results of the drug or alcohol tests are available  7.

 Upon the completion of the drugalcohol test a copy of all police reports will be forwarded through the chain of command to the chief of police  Allegations of Miscellaneous Drug-Related Acthity On or Off Duty A.

 Allegations of miscellaneous drug-related activity which would be considered reasonable suspicion requiring a drug test includes but is not limited to the following I.

 Illegal sale delivery manufacture Narcotics  purchase or possession of drugs and  2.

 Whenever the results of a preliminary criminal investigation indicate a reasonable suspicion to believe that the accused officer is involved in illegal drug-related activity or upon completion of the initial stages of an administrative investigation which indicates a reasonable suspicion to believe that the accused officer is personally using illegal drugs or is personally misusing or abusing legally prescribed or dispensed medications.

 3.

 A reasonable suspicion exists when a person has a reasonable belief that an individual is under the influence of a drug that affects behavior supp11able by direct observation particularly reasonable and common sense.

 ARTICLE XXII SEXUAL HARASSMENT  POLICY  With the condition that any discipline of an employee must be for just cause which may be contested through the 1rievanceprocedure the Borough of Brentwood Sexual Harassment Policy as presented in Chapter 5. of the Brentwood Borough Personnel Policies  Procedures Manual dated December 21 2 IO as may be amended from time to time in accordance with applicable laws is incorporated into and made part of this Award as it is folly set fo11hin this Article.

 ARTICLE XXIII HEALTH INSURANCE A.

 Hospitalization and Medical Benefits Brentwood Borough shall provide hospitalization and medical insurance coverage for all of its regular full-time employees and their dependents. Full-time employees shall be defined as employees scheduled to work more than 3 hours per week or as defined in the Federal Affordable Care Act.

The healthcare coverage as of the signing of this Agreement will be a high deductible Plan.

Each Bargaining Unit Member shall have a reimbursement account administered through an independent third party which shall provide up to Five Thousand dollars ($5) per year for other than single coverage and TwoThousand Five Hundred dollars ($25) for single coverages. This accountdebit card shall ONLY be used to cover those eligible expenses that are associated with the Plan Deductible. It is the employees responsibility to understand what is and is not an eligible expense for which the accountdebit card can be used.

Each January I the allowable annual deductibles will be reinstated and the reimbursement accounts will be restored to the Five Thousand dollars ($5) per year for other than single coverage and Two Thousand Five Hundred dollars ($25) for single coverages.

Upon reaching the plan deductible pockct Prescription Drug Co-Pays.

 the employee is responsible  for any out-of-  B. Effective January I 216 each full time officer shall contribute to the health insurance as indicated in the schedule below 216  $1.

 217  $1.

 218  $12.

 219  $12.

 Said contribution will be pre-tax and will be deducted on a pro-rated basis from each paycheck. If an employee is participating in the Health Insurance Waiver Option he shall not be responsible for any health care contribution.

 C.

 The Borough shall pay or reimburse the police officer for the amount of any innetworkout-of network deductible payments actually incurred but the police officers shall be responsible for all of their own co-pays. The police officer will make every good faith effort to try and use an in-network provider when possible.

The prescription drug program shall be as indicated on the healthcare plans Summary of Benefits.

 D.

 The Union agrees to supply any applications healthcare surveys or other infonnation that is pe1tinent to the Boroughs receiving accurate healthcare provider quotes within 3days from the date of request.

 E.

 The parties recognize the costs associated with health insurance coverage and also that insurance companies from time to time change the benefits offered within particular insurance plans or products. In order to allow the Employer the flexibility it needs to provide adequate health dental and vision insurance coverage to the employees the Employer shall have the continuing right to shop for comparable coverage to achieve cost savings and to suggest such alternate coverage to the employees. In the event the Employer chooses to switch to an alternate plan it shall not have a unilateral right to do so but shall first present the new plan to the employees. If the employees do not agree that the new coverage is comparable to the old coverage the parties shall have the right to submit the matter directly to grievance arbitration. The sole issue in that arbitration proceeding shall be whether the new plan is reasonably comparable overall in both costs and benefits to the old plan. The decision of the arbitrator in that event shall be binding on the parties and shall be issues within 45-days of the filing of the grievance. If the determination is that the new coverage is reasonably comparable the Employer shall have the right to switch.

This provision shall apply to the health insurance plan and also to the vision and dental insurance plans. The Bargaining Unit Members shall also have the right to suggest less expensive alternate coverage to the Employer and in fact the Members are encouraged to do so.

 F.

 Effective January I 212 Police officers hired during the tenn of this award shall be entitled to receive health insurance benefits in accordance with the above effective the first day of the month following the police officers first day of active duty with the Department contingent upon their successfully completing and submission of any and all enrollment fonns andor applications.

 G.

 Health Insurance Waiver Option - Eligible full-time officers may option to waive health insurance (including Dental and Vision) coverage as provided by the Borough of Brentwood in accordance with Chapter 11.2 - Cafeteria Plan of the Brentwood Borough Personnel Policies  Procedures Manual that may be updated or revised at the discretion of the Borough of Brentwood Council from time to time.

Any employee waiving the coverage under this article may re-enter the health insurance program in the event a non-medical reason for participating in the Brentwood plan has changed such as the employees insurance protection having been lost or modified due to his spouses death layoff discharge retirement or change in spouses coverage.

 2  I     H.

 The Union abreesupon the request of the Borough to meet and discuss issues concerning health insurance coverage.

 ARTICLE XXIV OPTICAL BENEFITS  The Borough shall pay the full cost for the VSP vision plan for each full-time police officer and his or her eligible dependents. Said coverage is currently provided by the Teamsters Local 25 Health and Welfare Probram.The Borough has the right to switch Vision Coverages as long as said coverage is substantially comparable to their current coverage.

 ARTICLE XXV DENTAL BENEFITS  The Borough shall pay the full cost for the Dental plan for each full-time police officer and his or her eligible dependents. Said coverage is currently provided by the Teamsters Local 25 Health and Welfare Probram.The Borough is currently in the process of changing the Dental Plan to a more universally accepted plan (i.e. United Concordia Premium Plan). However said plan will be substantially comparable to the current Dental Plan provided by the Teamsters Local 25 Health and Welfare Program. Regardless of the Dental Plan the Borough switches to the Borough shall maintain the right to switch Dental Coverages as long as said coverage is substantially comparable to their current coverage.

 ARTICLE XXVI LIFE INSURANCE  The Borough of Brentwood shall provide each $8. in Life Insurance with double indemnity in case of accidental death while on duty at no cost to himher. The Borough shall furnish satisfactory proof to each officer that heshe is so covered onset of said coverage to begin January l 199.

 ARTICLE XXVII DISABILITY BENEFITS The Borough shall continue to provide Non-occupational Short and Long Term Disability Coverage as in effect and will provide the employees with a copy of the current plan for a maximum period of fifty-two (52) weeks for the term of this agreement.

It is understood and agreed that an employee cannot receive both Sick Days Sick Bank or Vacation Days benefit pay from the Employer and the pro rate share of the wage continuation benefit paid for by the Employer under the STD or LTD insurance policy for the same periods of time. During such overlapping periods the Employer shall deduct from the employees pay an amount equal to the pro rata share of the benefit which heshe is entitled to receive under the aforesaid insurance policy.

Short Term Disability benefits shall commence for an employee who is injured off the job or suffers an extended illness after a thirty (3) calendar day waiting period. The benefit is equivalent to two-thirds (23) of their base pay.

Long Term Disability benefits shall commence for an employee who is injured off the job or suffers an extended illness after a ninety (9) calendar day waiting period. The benefit is equivalent to two-thirds (23) of their base pay.

An employee shall be eligible for short and long term disability benefits only if such employee has been a regular full-time employee for one (1) or more years and becomes totally disabled as a result of sickness or accident so as to be prevented from performing the duties of their employment and a licensed physician certified such total disability.

Benefits will not be payable for any period during which an employee is not under the care of a licensed physician.

To be eligible for such STD or LTD benefits the employee must give written notice to the Employer of his claim no later than twenty-one (21) days after the disability commences.

 ARTICLE XXVIII DEATH BENEFITS (retired) The beneficiary or beneficiaries designated by a full-time police officer shall upon his111erdeath after retirement be paid a death benefit of $15 provided that the police ot1icer retires after December 31 1989.

 ARTICLE XXIX RETIREMENT PAY A.

 The formula for computing retirement pay shall include the monthly average compensation of the police officer calculated from hisher annual wage and tax statement United States IRS Fonn W-2 for hisher last thirty-six (36) months employment.

 B.

 Police officers may be at their option established a 414 H-2 pre-tax deductions plan. However all police officers must participate in order to establish this plan.

 C.

 A police officer upon retirement may elect to receive payment for accrned vacation in a lump sum with the final paycheck.

 D.

 A police ofiicer may retire at age 55 with 25 years service. A police officer upon retirement with more than 25 years service shall receive an additional $25. per month for each year in excess of 25 years up to a maximum of$ I . per month for four (4) such years. Also effective January I 1993 a retirement benefit in the amount of fifty percent (5) ofa retired officers (deceased) pension benefit.

 ARTICLEXXX HOSPITALIZATION AFTER RETIREMENT All police officers retiring after December 31 1999 shall at their option remain in the Blue Cross Group Plan provided that retiree pay fifty percent (5) of the premium for same be paid by retiree and heshe continues to be eligible under the then existing hospitalization group contract.1l1eBorough of Brentwood shall assume fifty percent (5) of the retirees premium provided heshe continues to be eligible under the then existing hospitalization group contract.

All police officers hired after January 1 212 and upon reaching the age of 6 with 25 years of service to the Brentwood Borough Police Department shall at their option remain in the Boroughs Healthcare Plan benefits as those provided for active employees at any time either through negotiations or binding arbitration shall also apply equally to retiree benefits. Such changes include but are not limited to any changes in benefit structure cost sharing or any other change to eliminate or lessen the cost of the Cadillac tax to the Borough made by negotiations or through an Act 111 proceeding provided that retiree pay fifty percent (5) of the premiums for same and heshe continues to be eligible under the then existing hospitalization group contract. The Borough of Brentwood shall assume fifty percent (5) of the retirees premium provided heshe continues to be eligible under the then existing hospitalization group contract. In order to be eligible for this benefit an employee must have at least 25 years of service and be at least 6 years old at the time heshe retires which shall include the date of entry into a DROP.

Eli6ibilityif any for Borough subsidized post-retirement healthcare shall expire when the employee becomes eligible through another source including Medicare.

 ARTICLE XXXI PHYSICAL EXAMINATION Each police officer shall submit to a biennial physical examination by a physician selected by the Borough at the cost of the Borough with a copy of the medical repm1 to be furnished by Chainnan of the Public Safety Committee and to the Mayor of the Borough of Brentwood.

 ARTICLE XXXII POLICE PENSION AND DEATH BENEFIT PLAN The Council of the Borough of Brentwood shall continue to approve as additional Trustee for the Brentwood Borough Police Pension and Death Benefit Fund a full-time police officer employed by the Borough of Brentwood and elected as set f11h in Brentwood Borough Ordinance No. 875 as amended by Ordinance No. 889. Fu11herupon written request of any police officer after the effective date of the this Agreement the Council of tl1eBorough of Brentwood shall request the Trustees of said Fund to furnish a copy of any insurance policy or policies funding in pm1 or in whole any s Pension to him or her.

 ARTICLE XXXIII PENSION BENEFITS AND CONTRIBUTION A.

 Timely a11dappropriate amendments shall be made to the Brentwood Borough Police Pension and Benefit Plan Ordinances including Ordinm1ces No. 875 a11dNo 889 appeming in the Code ofOrdinm1ces of the Borough of Brentwood Chapter I Part 6-C.

 B.

 BeiinningJ a11uary1 199 the amount of social security benefits offset against the total monthly Borough Pension payment shall be eliminated and reduced to zero. Beginning Ja11uary1 199 the amount on monthly contribution to the Pension and Benefit Fund withheld from the compensation of a police officer shall be three and five tenths (3 .5) percent of all such compensation on which social security taxes are payable and a rate of five (5) percent of all such compensation in excess of that on which social security taxes are payable.

 C.

 Effective January 1 212 member contributions to the pension plan shall be set at  3.5. Beginning January 1 213 and each year thereafter police contributions shall be set up to 5 provided that an actuarial study conducted by the plan actuary detennines that contributions by the Borough would otherwise be necessary to keep the fund actuarially sound. In that event police officers shall be required to contribute to 5 of the compensation that is eligible for inclusion in a pension calculation as permitted by Act 6 in any year that contributions to the police pension plan are required. However in setting the contribution rate no participant contributions will be required unless and until the actuary detennines assuming the foreign casualty insurance funds received from  the Commonwealth attributable to the fact that the Borough maintains a police force are applied to reduce the funding obligation that additional contributions are necessary to maintain the actuarial soundness of the plan. The Borough is not required to direct all or a part of such monies into the plan except that there shall be no assessment of police officer contributions in any year in which the foreign casualty and foreign fire insurance tax monies coming to it because it has a police force (and attributable to the amount of money received by the Borough because of that police force) have been included in the cost study as funds available to satisfy the minimum municipal obligation.

The rate of five (5) percent of all such compensation in excess of that on which social security taxes are payable shall remain constant.

D.

 Deferred Retirement Option Plan (DROP) - The Borough of Brentwood shall offer eligible full time police officers a Deferred Retirement Option Plan (DROP) in accordance with Chapter 11.8 - DROP of the Brentwood Borough Personnel Policies  Procedures Manual.

 ARTICLE XXXIV PENSION FUND EVALUATION The Police Pension Fund shall be once every two (2) years evaluated by the Tmstees the Union and the Borough for the purpose of evaluatingthe actuarial increase or increment of benefits for police officers on retirement.

 ARTICLE XXXV LAYOFF AND REDUCTION OF WORKFORCE Any layoff of police officers will be controlled by the provisions of applicable law. Should there be any discussion of possibly disbanding or merging the Brentwood Police Department the Borough shall notify the Department a minimum of 12 months prior to any proposed date for said disbanding andor merging.

 ARTICLE XXXVI VERIFICATION OF FALSE ARREST INSURANCE The Borough of Brentwood will provide the Union with appropriate infonnation verifying the existence of false arrest insurance for Brentwood Borough.

 ARTICLE XXXVII POLICE OFFICER BILL OF RIGHTS  The Borough of Brentwood shall adopt implement and make a part of the parties collective bargaining agreement the provisions of the following Bill of Rights  I. When an anonymous complaint is made against a police officer and no corroborative evidence is obtained the complaint shall be classified as unfounded.

 2. When any citizen complaint is filed greater than ninety (9) calendar days after the alleged event complained of which if true could lead to a criminal charge such complaint shall be classified as unfounded and the accused employee shall not be required to submit a written repo1i but heshe shall be notified orally or in writing of such claim.

3. A police officer whether a subject or witness must be infonned of the nature of the interrogation at the outset of the interrogation.

4. If the interrogated police officer writes a written statement a transcript is taken or mechanical record is made a copy of same must be given to the interrogated police officer without cost upon request.

5. If any police officer under interrogation is under arrest or is likely to be placed under arrest as a result of the interrogation heshe shall be completely infonned of all hisher rights prior to the commencement of the interrogation.

6. At the request of any police officer under interrogation heshe shall have the right to be represented by counsel of hisher choice andor a Union representative who shall be present at all times during the interrogation. The interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonable time until representation can be obtained.

7. Unless agreed to by the officer the Borough of Brentwood shall not make any public comments on the reason for any disciplinary action brought action the officer.

8. If an officer becomes the subject of a non-criminal investigation Borough shall notify the officer as soon as reasonably feasible.

 the  9. The Borough will make every effort to investigate and act upon any potential disciplinary procedures involving an officer in a timely manner.

 26  I   ARTICLE XXXVIII DUES CHECK-OFF AND FAIR SHARE FEE DUES CHECK-OFF  ll1e Borough agrees to deduct monthly Union dues tees andor unifonn assessments of the Union from the first pay each month of any employee from whom written authmization is received and to send such monies to the Union on or before the end of the month for which the deduction is made.

A dues check-off authorized is to be involuntary but once given it may not be revoked until fifteen ( 15) days p1ior to the expiration of this Agreement.

The Union agrees to indemnify and hold the Borough harmless from any and all claims suits or other fonns ofliability arising out of its deductions of monies under this Article.

Monthly dues shall be owed by part-time officers only for those months in which they work at least thi1iy-two (32.) hours.

FAIR SHARE FEE  When a full-time or paii-time police officer declines to join the Union heshe shall nevertheless be assessed a fair share fee as defined in the Public Employee Fair Share Fee Law 43 P.S. Sec. 112.1 et seq The Union shall detennine the fee in accordance with and follow all procedures established by the Public Employee Fair Share Fee Law 4.3 P.S. Sec .

112.1etseq.

Monthly fair share fees shall be owed by part-time officers only for those months in which they work at least thirty-two (32) hours.

 ARTICLE XXXIX SICK LEAVE POLICY - DISABILITY  The paiiies understand and agree that sick leave is an important benefit available for use by a police officer who is unable to work due to medical illness or injury to the officer The Borough agrees to provide police officers with the same short-tem1 disability policy coverage it provides to other Borough employees.

Full-time police officers will be pennitted ten (I ) paid sick days per calendar year and such officers shall be pennitted to accumulate unused sick days from year to year to a maximum of ninety (9) unused and accumulated sick days.

Once 3 sick-days are accumulated the Borough agrees to buy-back up to 5-days per year at  75 of the Officers Base Salary ma lump sum payment by December I SI of each year.

 The Borough shall have the 1ight to investigate abuses of sick leave. Officers absent due to illness or injury for more than three (3) consecutive workdays may be required to be examined by a Borough-designated physician and may be required to submit to medical examinations andor tests before pennitted to return to work.

 ARTICLE XL TEAM LEGAL  The Borough shall provide and pay the full cost of the premiums for Criminal and Civil Defense Insurance for all full-time police officers but which insurance premium costs shall not exceed $9per year per oft1cer for each year of this Agreement. If the cost of the annual premium for such insurance exceeds $9per year per officer then either officer or the Union shall be responsible for such excess premium cost. At the time of execution of this Agreement the cmTent yearly premium cost for such insurance per officer is $86.88 per year.

 ARTICLEXLI TRAUMA TIC INCIDENT  If an officer is involved in a duty related traumatic incident (a shooting etc.) and is removed from duty by the Borough he shall be compensated at his regular rate of pay for all such shifts which he is removed by the Borough.

 ARTICLE XLII LIGHT DUTY POLICY  The parties a6reethat Light Duty is a managerial prerogative and may be implemented at the discretion of Brentwood Borough Council. Light duty will be offered in a fair and equal manner for all on or off duty injuries.

 ARTICLE XLIII SUBCONTRACTING  For the purpose of preserving work and job opportunities for the employees covered by this Agreement during the tenn of this Agreement the Employer agrees that no work or services of the kind nature or type covered by presently perfonned or hereafter assigned to the collective bargaining unit will be subcontracted transferred leased assigned or conveyed in whole or in part to any other corporation partnership person or non-unit employees without consent of the  Union unless otherwise provided in this Agreement or unless such work has been subcontracted by the Employer in the past and then in such event it is agreed that no bargaining unit employee shall be laid off as a result of such contracting.

 ARTICLE XLIV DRIVE AUTHORIZATION AND DEDUCTION  The Employer agrees to deduct from the paycheck of all employees covered by this Agreement voluntary contributions to DRIVE. DRIVE shall notify the Employer of the amount designated by each contributing employee that are to be deducted from hisher paycheck on a weekly basis for all weeks worked. The phrase weeks worked excludes any week other than a week in which the employee earned a wage. The Employer shall transmit to DRIVE National Headquarters on a monthly basis in one check the total amount deducted alongside the name of each employee on whose behalf a deduction is made employees Social Security Number and the amount deducted from employees paycheck. The International Brotherhood of Teamsters shall reimburse the Employer annually for the Employers actual cost for the expenses incurred in administering the weekly payroll deduction plan.

 ARTICLEXLV PROBATIONARY POLICE OFFICERS  A.

 Newly hired officers shall serve a twelve (12) month probationary period.

 B.

 During the probationary period probationary officer shall not be entitled to any fonn of leave time or other additional benefits afforded to non-probationary ofticers under the tenns of this agreement except for two (2) sick days for the probationary year after completing three (3) months of active duty. These sick days will not be carried over if the officer is hired as a full-time police officer.

 C.

 Upon satisfactory completion of the probationary period and hiring as a full-time police officer by the Borough of Brentwood each such officer will be entitled to four (4) personal days as outlined in Article XII above ten (1) vacation days as outlined in A1iicle XIII and ten (1) sick days as outlined in Article XXXIX. All leave time will be pro-rated on a calendar year basis where the numerator of the fraction is the number of full months remaining in the calendar year and the denominator is the number 12. By way of examrle if the offer of full-time employment is extended during any portion of the eighth (8) month the pro-rata share of personal days and vacation days to which the officer will be entitled is four-twelfths (412) or in this example I personal day 3 vacation days and 3 sick days until Dec. 31st.

 D.

 The only exception to the above exclusion from benefits for probationary police officers is healthcare insurance. Probationary police officers shall be eligible for healthcare insurance under the terms of this agreement. Refer to Article XXV.

 E.

 Probationary police officers are not entitled to the clothing allowance describe in Article XV during their probationary period. Upon hiring as a probationary officer each probationary officer will be provided with the necessary unifonn and equipment.

 F.

 Upon satisfactory completion of the probationary period and hiring as a full-time police officer by the Borough of Brentwood each such officer will be entitled to a clothing allowance as outlined in Article XV above pro-rated on a calendar year basis where the numerator of the fraction is the number of full months remaining in the calendar year and the denominator is the number 12. By way of example if the offer of full-time employment is extended during any portion of the eight (8 th) month the pro-rata share of the clothing allowance to which the officer will be entitled is four-twelfths (412).

 G.

 In the event a probationary police officer does not satisfactorily complete the probationary employment does not receive an offer of full-time employment or for any reason does not accept an offer of full-time employment from the Borough of Brentwood then all items of clothing and equipment provided to the officer at the time of hire shall be returned to the Borough of Brentwood.

 ARTICLE XLVI CANINE POLICE OFFICER Refer to Exhibit A attached.

 ARTICLE XL VII PART-TIME POLICE OFFICERS A.

There shall be no Part-Time Police Officers employed by the Borough of Brentwood under the Terms of this Agreement.

 3  i 1  ARTICLE XLVIII DURATION IN WITNESS WHEREOF THE PARTIES HERETO BY THEIR DULY AUTHORIZED OFFICERS AND REPRESENTATIVES AND INTENDING TO BE LEGALLY BOUND HEREBY HAVE AFFIXED THEIR HANDS AND SEALS THIS DAY OF  AUGUST 23 216.

 ATTEST  BOROUGH OF BRENTWOOD  1 George Z Borough M nager  ATTEST  TEAMSTERS LOCAL UNION NO. 25  Secretary-Treasurer  
