PROVISIONS FROM BOARDS OF ARBITRATION AWARDS AND COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS 
BETWEEN 
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA 
AND 
THE PENNSYLVANIA STATE TROOPERS ASSOCIATION 
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2012 TO JUNE 30, 2017 
Distributed by: Pennsylvania State Police Labor Relations Office Harrisburg, PA 17110 Phone (717) 787-8100 
INDEX 
Page  
Article 1, Recognition  3  
Article 2, Prior Arbitration Awards & Al!feements  3  
Article 3, Distribution of Booklet  3  
Article 4, Salaries  3  
Article 5, Union Security & Assessments  6  
Article 6, Schedulimt  7  
Article 7, Overtime  8  
Article 8, Shift Differential  8  
Article 9, Call Time  9  
Article 10, Alert Time  9  
Article 11, Holidays  9  
Article 12, Personal Days  10  
Article 13, Vacations  11  
Article 14, Sick Leave  13  
Article 15, Medical Leave Extension  15  
Article 16, Life Insurance  15  
Article 17, Survivor Benefits -PSTA Scholarship Fund  16  
Article 18, Disability Benefits  18  
Article 19, Hosoital and Medical Insurance  18  
Article 20, Prescription Drug Proirram  21  
Article 21 , Vision Care Plan  22  
Article 22, Dental Care Prol!l'am  22  
Article 23, Health Reimbursement Arran,zement  23  
Article 24, Emergency Counseling Pro2TI1I11  23  
Article 25, Retirement  24  
Article 26, Discipline  25  
Article 27, Legal Counsel  30  
Article 28, Grievance Procedure  30  
Article 29, Administrative Leave  37  
Article 30, Union Business  38  
Article 31, Personnel Files  38  
Article 32, Clothing Maintenance  39  
Article 33, Outside Employment  39  
Article 34, Reduction in Force  39  
Article 35, Member Treatment  40  
Article 36, Temporary Assi2I1J11ent  40  
Article 37, Specialized Positions and Training  41  
Article 38, Transfers  48  
Article 39, Badge, Retirement ID, Honorable Discharge Upon Retirement  49  

1 
Article 40, Car Utilization Study  49  
Article 41, Health Care Cost Containment Committee  49  
Article 42, Special Committee-Promotion System  50  
Article 43, Side Letters  50  
Article 44, Physical Fitness Committee  50  
Article 45, Family Care Leave  51  
Article 46, Limited Duty  52  
Article 4 7, Employee Authorized Payroll Deductions  53  
Article 48, Leave Donation Prol!fam  54  
Article 49, Civilianization  56  
Article 50, Tobacco Use  57  
Article 51, Health Care Shop Around  57  
Article 52, Term ofAfil'eement  58  
Aooendix A, State Police Pay Schedule, July 1, 2012  59  
Appendix B, State Police Pay Schedule, July 1, 2013 Table I-Members hired prior to 7/1/2013• Table 2-Members hired on or after 7/1/2013•  61  
Appendix C, State Police Pay Schedule, July l, 2014 Table I-Members hired prior to 7/1/2014• Table 2-Members hired on or after 7/1/2014 •  65  
Appendix D, State Police Pay Schedule, July 1, 2015 Table I-Members hired prior to 7/1/2015• Table 2-Members hired on or after 7/1/2015•  69  
Appendix E, State Police Pay Schedule, July 1, 2016 Table I-Members hired prior to 7/1/2016• Table 2-Members hired on or after 7/1/2016 •  73  
Appendix F, Discipline Standards  77  
Aooendix G, Index ofReferences to Arbitration Awards & Al!feements  80  

2 
ARTICLE 1 RECOGNITION 
Pursuant to Act 111 of 1968, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania recognizes the Pennsylvania State Troopers Association (PST A) as the exclusive representative for collective bargaining purposes for all State Police members excluding the Commissioner, Deputy Commissioners and cadets. 
ARTICLE2 PRIOR ARBITRATION AWARDS AND AGREEMENTS 
Section 1. All prior arbitration awards and agreements are hereinafter incorporated by reference and the provisions of the awards and agreements shall be applicable except as modified herein or by mutual agreement between the parties. 
Section 2. Ifany ofthe awards by an arbitration panel are not implemented either as a result of legal impediment or failure to obtain legislation, then the Arbitration Panel shall be reconvened so that an equivalent benefit can be given in place of the benefit not granted. Ifthe neutral chairman is not available then the parties shall select another neutral chairman by the method provided in Act 111 ofthe Commonwealth. 
ARTICLE3 DISTRIBUTION OF BOOKLET 
The Commonwealth shall print and distribute to each member as quickly as possible the terms ofthis Agreement and other relevant provisions ofprevious awards and agreements. 
ARTICLE4 
SALARIES 
Section I. Effective July 1, 2012, the base pay rates of Troopers in the State Police Pay Schedule shall be increased by 1.0%. 
Section 2. Effective July 1, 2013, the base pay rates of Troopers in the State Police Pay Schedule shall be increased by 2.0%. 
Section 3. Effective July I, 2014, the base pay rates of Troopers in the State Police Pay Schedule shall be increased by 2.5%. 
Section 4. a. Effective July I, 2015, the base pay rates ofTroopers in the State Police Pay Schedule shall be increased by 2.5%. 
b. Effective July I, 2016, the base pay rates of Troopers in the State Police Pay Schedule shall be increased by 3.0%. 
Section 5. There shall be maintained a rank differential between base rates within the ranks as follows: 
a. 
The rate for the rank of Corporal shall be 8.0% above the highest base (Step E) without longevity ofa Trooper. 

b. 
The rate for the rank of Sergeant shall be 8.5% above the rate (Step E) without longevity ofa Corporal; 

C. 
The rate for the rank of Lieutenant shall be 9.0% above the rate (Step E) without longevity ofa Sergeant; 

d. 
The rate for the rank of Captain shall be 9.0% above the rate (Step E) without longevity ofa Lieutenant; 

e. 
The rate for the rank of Major shall be 9.5% above the rate (Step E) without longevity ofa Captain; 


The existing step "E" for the rank of Corporal and above shall be the rate upon which the base differential shall be calculated. 
Section 6. In addition to base salary, members shall be entitled to the longevity rate indicated for their years ofservice in the following table: 
6.0% ofbase pay at the commencement ofa member's sixth (61h) year ofservice 7.0% ofbase pay at the commencement ofa member's seventh (7th) year ofservice 8.0% ofbase pay at the commencement ofa member's eighth (8th) year ofservice 9.0% ofbase pay at the commencement ofa member's ninth (9th) lear ofservice 10.0% ofbase pay at the commencement ofa member's tenth (10 ) year ofservice 11.0% of base pay at the commencement ofa member's eleventh (11th) year ofservice 12.0% ofbase pay at the commencement ofa member's twelfth (12th) rear ofservice 13.0% ofbase pay at the commencement ofa member's thirteenth (131 ~ year ofservice 14.0% ofbase pay at the commencement ofa member's fourteenth (141 ) year ofservice 15.0% ofbase pay at the commencement of a member's fifteenth (15th) year ofservice 16.0% ofbase pay at the commencement of a member's sixteenth (16th) year ofservice 17.0% ofbase pay at the commencement ofa member's seventeenth (17'h) year ofservice 18.0% of base pay at the commencement ofa member's eighteenth (18th) year ofservice 
19.0% ofbase pay at the commencement ofa member's nineteenth (19th) year ofservice 20.0% ofbase pay at the commencement ofa member's twentieth (20th) year ofservice 21.0% of base pay at the commencement ofa member's twenty-first (2151) year ofservice 22.0% of base pay at the commencement ofa member's twenty-second (22"d) year ofservice 23.0% ofbase pay at the commencement ofa member's twenty-third (23n1) year ofservice 24.0% ofbase pay at the commencement ofa member's twenty-fourth (24th) year ofservice 25.0% ofbase pay at the commencement ofa member's twenty-fifth (25th) year ofservice 26.0% ofbase pay at the commencement ofa member's twenty-sixth (26th) year ofservice 27.0% ofbase pay at the commencement ofa member's twenty-seventh (271h) year ofservice 28.0% ofbase pay at the commencement ofa member's twenty-eighth (28th) year ofservice 
Section 7. a. Members who graduate from the State Police Academy shall start at Step S of the Trooper pay range and shall have an anniversary date one year from the date of graduation. All members shall receive one increment each year on their anniversary date until they reach the maximum oftheir pay range. 
b. Members who are hired after July 1, 2013, the wage progression from Step S to Step E shall be as follows: 
Step S  75% ofthe Step E Rate  
Step A  80% ofthe Step E Rate  
StepB  85% ofthe Step E Rate  
StepC  90% ofthe Step E Rate  
StepD  95% ofthe Step E Rate  
StepE  100% (Base Salary)  

Section 8. Members who are promoted shall be placed in the new pay range at the same step and longevity range as that held prior to the promotion with no change in the member's anniversary date or longevity date. 
Section 9. In calculating length of service for longevity purposes, the date of a member's service shall be counted from the date ofenlistment. For the purpose of this Article, a member1s longevity date will not be adjusted for leaves without pay granted in accordance with Article 15, Sections 1 and 2 and Article 45, Section I. 
Section 10. There shall be a Step denoted as Trooper 1st Class. Troopers shall advance to 
st
Trooper 1 Class after 12 years of service, and shall be furnished with a clearly noticeable uniform insignia to denote their status. The differential rate for a Trooper 1st Class shall be 2% above the Step E rate. The appropriate longevity increment based on total years of service shall then be applied to that rate. Effective July 1, 2013, each Trooper 1st Class shall be paid an annual Master Trooper differential of 3% above the Step E rate upon commencement of their 
23rd 
year ofcredited service. 
Section 11. Effective January 1, 2009, all bargaining unit members shall be required to sign 
up for direct deposit ofpaychecks and travel reimbursements. 
ARTICLE5 UNION SECURITY & ASSESSMENTS 
Section l. The Commonwealth shall deduct the current PSTA arbitration assessment from compensation received by a member. The arbitration assessment shall be deducted at the rate of 1/261 h ofthe total assessment from such member's paycheck each pay and shall be forwarded to the PSTA by the Commonwealth. For members who have not joined the PSTA, a service charge shall be deducted from their compensation as a contribution toward the administration of arbitration awards and the costs ofcollective bargaining and representation ofmembers in the same manner and amount or percentage as the arbitration assessment. The biweekly amount to be deducted shall be certified to the Commonwealth by the PST A. Upon failure to pay the charge or fee, the Commonwealth shall discharge the member when advised by the PST A. 
Section 2. Where a member has been suspended, furloughed, or discharged and subsequently returned to work, with full or partial back pay, or has been reclassified retroactively, the Commonwealth shall deduct the assessments and charges that are due and owing for the period for which the member receives back pay. Arbitration assessments and service charges will be resumed for members upon their return from leave ofabsence without pay or recall from furlough. 
Section 3. The Commonwealth shall provide the PSTA, on a quarterly basis, a list ofall State Police members excluding the Commissioner, Deputy Commissioners and cadets. This list shall contain the member's name, social security number, address, rank and work location. 
Section 4. The PSTA shall indemnify and hold the Commonwealth harmless against any and all claims, suits, orders and judgments brought or issued against the Commonwealth as a result of the action taken or not taken by the Commonwealth under the provisions ofthis Article. 
ARTICLE6 SCHEDULING 
Section l. The workweek shall consist of any five workdays in the week from Saturday through Friday. 
Section 2. The workday for all members shall be any eight consecutive hours, inclusive ofthe meal period, within the period from midnight to midnight ofthe calendar day; up to two hours may be in the preceding or subsequent day. Should the time overlap of two hours be exceeded by the Commonwealth, the member so assigned shall be paid time and one-half ofhis/her rate ofpay, for all hours in excess ofthe two hour overlap period. 
Section 3. There shall be a minimum of eight hours off between shifts. When two shifts are worked with fewer than eight hours off, hours worked in the eight hour period beginning with the end of the first shift shall be paid at a rate of two and one-half times the hourly rate. A member shall receive no additional compensation for work performed during this period. 
This provision shall not apply where the member voluntarily changes his/her shift after the schedule is posted and thereafter works a shift with fewer than eight (8) hours off (said eight (8) hour period including any call time that may occur) which would not have occurred but for the voluntary change in shift. This foregoing exception shall not prevail when a member is called in pursuant to Article 9, Call Time. 
Section 4. A change in shift after the shift is posted may take place where 24 hours' notice is given prior to the start of the newly-scheduled shift. Any change in schedule without such notice shall be paid at the rate of time and one-half for all hours on that shift. This section shall not be construed as preventing such shift changes. 
Section 5. A member shall not be required to remain within the jurisdiction ofhis/her station during non-working hours. This provision shall not apply to a member who is on alert time. 
Section 6. The roster of bargaining unit members' shifts shall be posted at each work location no later than the Tuesday two weeks preceding that described in the roster. 
Section 7. Court Time 
a. 
Once posted as provided in Section 6 above, the roster shall not be changed as a result of the necessity for the member to be present at any judicial or administrative proceeding relating to or arising from the performance of his/her duties, except with the affected member's voluntary permission. No member shall be discriminated against for withholding such permission. 

b. 
ln the event that the member would be required to be present at any judicial or administrative proceeding relating to or arising from the performance ofhis/her duties on a day or shift for which he/she had been scheduled off in accordance with the posted roster, he/she shall be compensated in accordance with Article 9. 


Section 8. A scheduling committee comprised of four persons to be selected by the Department and four persons to be selected by the PST A shall meet and discuss all issues related to the current scheduling system. The committee shall develop a pilot program to be implemented no later than December 22, 2005. The pilot program shall be limited to a six month period in one Troop to be selected by the Department in its discretion. The pilot program shall not: increase the costs of operations; entail the use of 12 hour shifts; adversely impact the efficiency or safety of affected operations or standards of service; or contain an unreasonable number ofwork schedules. 
ARTICLE 7 OVERTIME 
Section 1. The Commonwealth shall pay one and one-half ofthe member's regular hourly rate for all hours worked in excess of eight per day or 40 per week. The 8-hour day and the 40-hour week shall include all lunch periods. ln calculating time worked, all time shall be included, except alert time. Time worked shall include, but not be limited to extension of work schedule, court time, magistrate's time, mandated school time, reserve time and stand-by time. 
Section 2. Days taken by a member as sick leave days are to be counted as work days for the purpose ofcomputing overtime. 
Section 3. The Commonwealth shall pay one and one-half ofthe member's regular hourly rate for all consecutive hours worked in excess ofeight whether they occurred in one or two calendar days. 
ARTICLES SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL 
Section 1. A shift differential of5% will be paid for all hours actually worked between 12:00 noon and 10:00 p.m. A shift differential of 6% will be paid for all hours actually worked between I 0:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
Section 2. Criminal lnvestigation personnel scheduled by the Employer to work during the hours set forth in Section 1 above shall be paid as therein provided. Shift differential shall not be paid to Criminal Investigation personnel when the hours worked are employee controlled or are incidental to the cases assigned to such personnel. 
Section 3. Effective December 24, 2008, regardless of the above language, no shift differential shall be paid during any regularly scheduled shift that starts at or after 6:00 a.m. and before 12:00 noon. 
ARTICLE9 CALL TIME 
A member who has been called in to work outside of his/her scheduled shift shall be guaranteed a minimwn ofthree hours ofpay at the members regular hourly rate or shall be paid at the appropriate rate for all hours worked, whichever is greater. A member shall be released when the specific purpose ofthe call in has been satisfied. However, when the member is called into work but the call in is cancelled before the member leaves his/her home, the member will be paid for actual time from the original call in to the cancellation but in thirty (30) minute increments. 
The compensable period shall begin when the member is notified. 
ARTICLE 10 ALERT TIME 
Section l. One-quarter pay shall be paid for alert time, defined as off-duty time when a member is restricted as to where he/she may go or what he/she may do in order that he/she may quickly return to duty upon call. The compensation is to apply to situations when a member is alerted in connection with special circwnstances (present or anticipated) and is not meant to cover any regular or rotational duty which may result in being recalled to active duty status. 
Section 2. While alert time shall not be included in calculations to determine overtime pay, the Commonwealth shall not abuse the putting ofmembers on alert. 
ARTICLE 11 HOLIDAYS 
Section I. The following days shall be considered as holidays: 
New Year's Day* Independence Day* Martin Luther King, Jr. Labor Day* 
Day Columbus Day* Presidents' Day Veterans' Day* Good Friday* General Election Day Primary Election Day Thanksgiving Day* Memorial Day* Christmas Day* 
Effective July 1, 2013, Primary Election Day shall be eliminated as a holiday. 
Section 2. A member who works on any ofthe above holidays will be given a compensatory day off. In addition, ifthe member's regular weekly days offcoincide with a holiday, he/she shall be given a compensatory day off. 
Section 3. Ifa holiday is observed while a member is on sick leave, annual or other paid leave status, he/she will receive his/her holiday pay and the day will not be charged against sick, annual, or other paid leave credits. 
Section 4. If a member is required to work on one of the holidays designated by an asterisk above, the member shall receive double time for all work performed on such a holiday. ln addition, the member shall receive compensatory time off for all hours worked up to eight (8.0) hours. 
When a member voluntarily works on one of these holidays for a special enforcement program, the member will be paid at the rate of time and one-half provided the member was in compensable status for 40 other hours that week. 
ARTlCLE 12 PERSONAL DAYS 
Section I. Each member shall receive four personal leave days per calendar year. One personal leave day shall be earned during each one-quarter calendar year. Where practical, they are to be granted at the option of the member. All requests for personal leave shall be approved or disapproved no later than 10 working days prior to the commencement ofthe requested leave. No request for personal leave shall be unreasonably denied. Members may anticipate personal leave to which they may become entitled during the calendar year. Any member who anticipates such leave and who subsequently terminates employment shall reimburse the Employer for those days of personal leave used but not earned. The members shall be required to utilize two personal days by June 30. Ifa member is required to work on a scheduled personal leave day and is unable to reschedule the day by June 30, due to the demands ofhis/her work, a seven pay period extension will be granted. Each calendar year, each member shall be entitled to designate one ( l) day of his/her personal leave allotment as an emergency personal leave day which shall not be denied 
Section 2. Personal leave shall be non-cumulative from calendar year to calendar year. However, members will be permitted to carry over personal leave days into the first seven pay periods ofthe next calendar year. Any days carried over in accordance with this Section which are not scheduled and used during the first seven pay periods ofthe next calendar year will be lost. 
Section 3. For the purpose ofthis Article, the calendar year shall be defined as beginning with the member's first full pay period commencing on or after January I and continuing through the end of the member's pay period that includes December 31. For the purpose of this Article, the calendar quarters shall be defined as beginning with the first full pay period in January through March 31, April l through June 30, July 1 through September 30, and October I through the last full pay period ofthe leave calendar year, which is the pay period that includes December 31. 
ARTICLE 13 VACAT(ONS 
Section I. Members shall earn leave according to the following schedule: 
Service Maximum Annual Leave Entitlement Per Year: 
Less than 1 year: 40 Hour Workweek: Annual leave will be earned at the rate 80 Hours (IO days) of 3.85% ofall Regular Hours Paid 
Over 1 year to 13 years: 40 Hour Workweek: Annual leave will be earned at the rate 120 Hours (15 days) of5. 77% ofall Regular Hours Paid 
Over 13 years to 21 years: 40 Hour Workweek: Annual leave will be earned at the rate 160 Hours (20 days) of7.70% ofall Regular Hours Paid 
Over 21 years: 40 Hour Workweek: Annual leave will be earned at the rate 208 Hours (26 days) of I 0% ofall Regular Hours Paid 
Regular Hours Paid as used in this Article include all hours paid except overtime, alert time, call time and full-time out service training. 
Members shall be credited with a year of service for each 26 pay periods completed in an active pay status provided they were paid a minimum ofone hour in each pay period. 
Length of service for the purpose of detennining vacation earning rate shall include all periods ofservice as a Commonwealth employee. 
Section 2. Annual leave may be carried over from one calendar year to the next to a maximum of60 days (480 hours). However, members will be pennitted to carry over annual leave in excess of the sixty day limit into the first seven pay periods of the next calendar year. Any days carried over in accordance with this Section which are not scheduled and used during the first seven pay periods of the next calendar year will be lost. Members on disability leave who have been unable to take their annual leave resulting in an excess carry-over at the end ofthe year shall be authorized a seven pay period extension upon return from disability leave. 
In the event that the carryover of accumulated vacation would include a fraction of a day, the fraction will be rounded up or down to the nearest whole day. 
All requests for annual leave shall be approved or disapproved no later than 10 working days prior to the commencement ofthe requested leave. 
Section 3. A member shall have the right to have a minimum of four scheduled days off (non-compensable) contiguous with his/her annual or any other leave to which he/she may be entitled, provided that the scheduled compensable time off be at least five consecutive days in duration. 
Section 4. A member's "Leave Period", which consists of at least five compensable non-work days, shall be deemed to have commenced at the end of the last scheduled shift prior to the scheduled leave and to end at the beginning of the member's first scheduled shift after leave has expired. 
Section 5. If a member is recalled to work from approved annual or personal leave, the member is entitled to compensation for a minimum of eight hours at the rate of time and one-half for each day worked and the day will not be charged against the member's annual or personal leave. The member will also be granted a compensatory vacation day at a later date for each non-compensable day worked if he/she is recalled after a .,Leave Period" as defined in Section 4 above has commenced. 
Section 6. Ifa member has selected leave under a tentative leave schedule and the dates of such leave were not refused when the tentative schedule was constructed, then any member who has his/her leave or portion of leave canceled within 30 days of the scheduled commencement of such leave shall be pennitted to reschedule such leave at a time of his/her choosing, provided it is after the emergency that gave rise to the cancellation has ended and provided his/her request will not cause cancellation of the scheduled leave ofanother member. 
Section 7. The requirement that no more than 10% ofthe members on a station can be off on leave at the same time shall not be mandatory. Consistent with operational requirements, leave requests shall not be unreasonably denied. 
Section 8. For the purpose ofthis Article, the calendar year shall be defined as beginning with the member's first full pay period commencing on or after January 1 and continuing through the end ofthe member's pay period that includes December 31. 
ARTICLE 14 
SICK LEAVE 
Section 1. Members shall earn sick leave in accordance with the following schedule: 
Maximum Sick Leave Entitlement Per Year 
Sick Leave will be 40 Hour Workweek: earned at the rate 124.8 hours (15.6 days) of6% ofall Regular Hours Paid 
Regular Hours Paid as used in this Article include all hours paid except overtime, alert time, call time and full-time out-service training. 
Section 2. Accumulation 
Members shall be permitted to accumulate sick leave that is unused each year to a maximum accumulation of410 days (3280 hours). 
Section 3. Members may use up to five days of sick leave for the death ofa spouse, parent, stepparent, child, or stepchild and up to three days of sick leave may be used for the death of a brother, sister, grandparent, step-grandparent, grandchild, step-grandchild, son-or daughter-in-law, brother-or sister-in-law, parent-in-law, grandparent-in-law, aunt, uncle, foster child, step-sister, step-brother, or any relative residing in the member's household. 
Section 4. Where sickness in the immediate family requires the member's absence from work, members may use not more than five days of sick leave entitlement in each calendar year for that purpose. Immediate family is defined as the following persons: husband, wife, child, step-child, foster child, parent, brother or sister of such member. The Employer may require proof of such sickness. 
Section 5. 

a. 
Members who retire with less than 25 years of service shall be paid 35% of their accumulated unused sick leave not to exceed 117 days. Part days shall not be paid. The eligible dependents of a member who dies prior to retirement shall be paid 35% of the member's accumulated unused sick leave at the time ofhis/her death not to exceed 117 days. Part days shall not be paid. 

b. 
Members who retire with at least 25 years of service and eligible dependents of members who are killed in the line of duty shall be paid for full days of accumulated unused sick leave in accordance with the following schedule: 


Days Available Percentage Maximum 
At Retirement Buyout Days 
0-135 35% 47 
136-235 40% 94 
236-335 50% 167 
over 335 100%of 75 
days over 
335 
Section 6. In the event that a member is receiving Workers' Compensation, he/she shall be permitted to utilize sick leave to provide the difference in biweekly compensation between the monies received from Workers' Compensation and 100% of his/her normal biweekly compensation. Under such circumstances, sick leave shall be deducted from the member's accumulated sick leave in increments ofone hour to equal the 100% maximum compensation. 
Section 7. In accordance with Section 6 above, members who are not receiving Heart and Lung Act benefits may use sick leave to supplement Workers' Compensation benefits. The Workers' Compensation supplement will be the difference between net salary and Workers' Compensation and Social Security disability benefits (ifapplicable). Net salary is defined as gross base pay minus applicable payroll taxes and retirement contributions. The Employer will continue to remit appropriate payroll taxes and retirement contributions on behalfofthe member. The hours of sick leave charged biweekly while the supplement is payable will be calculated by subtracting the Workers' Compensation amount from the member's regular gross pay and dividing the result by the member's hourly rate ofpay, rounded to the next highest hour. 
Upon determination by the Employer that a member is entitled to the Workers' Compensation supplement, the member will receive the supplement for a period ofup to 30 days or to the extent sick leave is available, during which time the member must elect to either continue receiving the Workers' Compensation supplement or to retire. In the event the member retires during the 30-day period, the member shall be paid for full days ofaccumulated unused sick leave in accordance with Section 5.b. of this Article. In the event the member elects to continue the Workers' Compensation supplement or makes no election within the 30-day period, the Workers' Compensation supplement will continue until sick leave is exhausted or until the member retires, whichever is earlier. If a member retires after the 30-day period, payment for accumulated unused sick leave will be in accordance with Section 5.a. or 5.b. ofthis Article, as applicable. 
Section 8. For the purpose ofthis Article, the calendar year shall be defined as beginning with the member's first full pay period commencing on or after January I and continuing through the end ofthe member's pay period that includes December 31. 
ARTICLE 15 MEDICAL LEA VE EXTENSION 
Section 1. A member who becomes disabled because of illness or an off-the-job accident shall be entitled to six months of leave without pay, during which time his/her medical benefits, supplemental health benefits, and Group Life Insurance shall continue in force and be paid for by the Commonwealth. 
Section 2. A member who is granted parental leave without pay shall continue to receive medical benefits, supplemental health benefits, and Group Life Insurance benefits which shall be paid for by the Commonwealth for up to six months. 
Section 3. Any extension of leave under Section 1 or 2 above shall be without benefits and shall be at the discretion ofthe Employer. 
Section 4. A member shall not be required to use accumulated sick, annual and/or personal leave prior to the commencement ofa leave without pay under this Article. 
ARTICLE 16 LIFE INSURANCE 
The Employer shall assume the entire cost ofthe currently existing life insurance plan. The amount ofinsurance is based on the member's annual pay rate in effect on the preceding January I, rounded to the nearest $1,000 but not to exceed $50,000. 
ARTICLE 17 SURVIVOR BENEFlTS PST A SCHOLARSHIP FUND 
Section 1. In the event a member is killed in the line of duty. the eligible dependents of the deceased member shall be entitled to all medical benefits for the life of the spouse, or until remarriage of the spouse. whichever is earlier and until age 19 (25 ifenrolled full time as a student) for the children. 
Section 2. PST A Scholarship Fund 
a. As of July 1 of each year of the contract, the Commonwealth shall deposit Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) into an interest bearing account to be used for the purpose of providing scholarship assistance to state-related schools for dependents of members who were killed in the line of duty on or after July 1, 1988. The recipient. nature and amount of such assistance shall be determined by a committee composed of one representative from the PST A and one designated by the Commissioner. 
b. 
Definitions 

(
1) "Eligible dependent" means the spouse. child. stepchild or legally adopted child of a State Police member killed in the line of duty who qualifies as a dependent under IRS guidelines. 

(2) 
"State-related schools" shall mean the following Pennsylvania institutions ofhigher learning: Pennsylvania State University, University of Pittsburgh, Temple, Lincoln, Bloomsburg. California, Cheyney, Clarion, East Stroudsburg, Edinboro, Indiana, Kutztown, Lock Haven, Mansfield, Millersville, Shippensburg. Slippery Rock or West Chester Universities. 

(3) 
"Killed in the line of duty" means any member whose death is attributable to work-related circumstances and approved under Act 101-102 of 1981 and the Public Safety Officers' Benefit Act of 1976. 

(4) 
"Full-time student" shall mean a minimum course work load of at least 12 credit hours per semester. 

(5) 
11Approved program of higher education" shall mean scholarship assistance for enrollment in a degree program at a state-related school for eight semesters or the completion of a Baccalaureate degree, whichever occurs sooner. 



c. 
Scholarship Assistance for Eligible Dependents 


A committee has been authorized to establish guidelines for the purpose ofadministering a scholarship assistance program pursuant to Section 2 ofthis Article. 
Scholarship assistance shall be afforded to eligible dependents who are full-time students enrolled in an approved program of higher education at a state-related school within the Commonwealth. The student must meet admission requirements, must be accepted under the current admissions policy for course work and must remain in good academic standing at the completion of each semester, as defined by the institution of attendance. As a prerequisite to approving any assistance, students must execute a waiver with the institution for the Committee to be provided with a copy ofthe transcript ofgrades upon the completion ofeach semester. 
d. Amount ofScholarship 
Scholarships awarded by the Committee will supplement available grants to the student and shall not exceed the cumulative total of tuition and fees of$1,000 per semester or up to $2,000 per academic year, whichever is the lesser. 
Before becoming eligible for scholarship assistance, the student must apply for and declare all state and financial aid grants and authorize the Committee to receive and review any financial aid transcripts on file with the institution. 
e. Miscellaneous 
Further implementation and interpretation of the guidelines enumerated herein are reseived to the Committee. The Committee reserves the right to change or amend the program subject to adequate notice which shall be distributed to all members. The determination of the Committee regarding interpretation ofthe guidelines is final. 
f. Effective upon the issuance of the 2012-2017 Award, the Commonwealth shall have the right to cease annual funding for the Line of Duty Death Scholarship Fund. The residue ofthe existing account shall be deposited into the Health and Welfare Fund. 
ARTICLE 18 DISABILITY BENEFITS 
Section 1. If a member has been found to be eligible for a disability retirement and if the disability has been found to be a permanent and total service-connected disability, such member shall receive a supplement equal to 70% of Final Average Salary less the sum of the regular disability retirement and the amounts payable under the Pennsylvania Workers' Compensation Act, the Pennsylvania Occupational Disease Act and the Federal Social Security Act. The service-connected disability retirement supplement will continue as long as the member is determined to be permanently and totally disabled on account ofthe service-connected disability. 
Section 2. If a member becomes injured while on duty, during the time of his/her disability, 
he/she shall continue to receive all benefits to which he/she would otherwise have become entitled, 
including pay increases and accumulation ofannual leave. 
ARTICLE 19 HOSPITAL AND MEDICAL INSURANCE* 
Section l. Members shall have the choice of receiving 100% state-paid coverage either in the present indemnity plan (Indemnity Plan), or a Managed Care Plan, except that all members hired on or after April 21, 2005 shall only be eligible to participate in a Managed Care Plan. 
Managed Care Plans: All members shall be offered a Preferred Provider Organization Plan (PPO Plan), selected by the Commonwealth which shall have benefits equal to the existing Indemnity Program. The PPO Program shall be offered on a statewide basis. In addition, the Commonwealth, at its discretion, may contract with Health Maintenance Organization plans (HMO Plans) or Point of Service plans (POS Plans) as optional alternatives for coverage in selected areas of Pennsylvania. Where more than one Managed Care Plan is offered in an area, the member may select from among the options. 
The Indemnity Plan and the Managed Care Plans each must conform to its respective plan design set forth in this Article. Each plan also must provide dependency coverage where the dependents of the member qualify under the respective plan. 
Section 2. lndemnity Plan 
The Indemnity Plan includes the Pre-certification Plan as described in the side letter between the parties dated October 15, 1985. The Major Medical maximum for general medical expenses shall be $1,000,000 provided, however, that coverage for all general cases will be based upon the most cost effective but medically appropriate treatment alternative. A voluntary case management program has been instituted for all phases ofthe hospital and medical program. The plan will cover medically necessary air ambulance services at 100% of the provider's charge. 
The annual Major Medical deductible for the Indemnity Plan is $250 individual and $750 family. 
Members participating in the Indemnity Plan also will participate in the Emergency Counseling Plan (Article 24). 
Section 3. PPO Plans and POS Plans 
In-Network 
Annual Deductible None 
Member Coinsurance None; Plan pays 100% 
Out-of-Pocket Maximum None 
Primary Care Copayment $15 ($20 after hours) 
Specialist Copayment $25 
Outpatient Therapy Copayment $15 
Emergency Room Copayment $50, waived ifadmitted 
Mental Health -Outpatient Visit $25, 60 visit limit per calendar year 
Lifetime Maximum Unlimited 
Out-of-Network 
Annual Deductible $250 per individual and $750 per family (accrued 
separately from in-network) 
Member Coinsurance 20% up to out-of-pocket limit 
Annual Out-of-Pocket Maximum $1,500 ($3,000 per family), not including 
deductible 
Emergency Room Copayment $50, waived ifadmitted 
Mental Health -Outpatient Visit 50% coinsurance after deductible 
Lifetime Maximum $1,000,000 
The PPO plan will provide female covered persons at 100% of the Preferred Professional Provider Allowance for: (a) one routine gynecological examination each calendar year, including a pelvic examination and clinical breast examination, and routine Pap smears in accordance with the recommendations of the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists; and (b) one screening and diagnostic Mammogram each calendar year, provided that benefits for mammography are payable only if performed by a qualified mammography service provider who is properly certified by the appropriate state or federal agency in accordance with the Mammography Quality Assurance Act of 1992. 
Section 4.  HMO Plans  
In-Network  
Annual Deductible  None  
Member Coinsurance  None; Plan pays 100%  
Out-of-Pocket Maximum  None  
Primary Care Physician Copayment  $15 ($20 after hours)  
Specialist Copayment  $25  
Outpatient Therapy Copayment  $15  
Emergency Room Copayment  $50, waived ifadmitted  
Mental Health -Outpatient Visit  $25, 60 visit limit per calendar year  
Lifetime Maximum  Unlimited  
Section 5.  Coverage  

Coverage under all of the medical plans shall cease on the date a member terminates employment. For the purpose of this Section, termination does not include retirement or death. The Commonwealth shall pay the cost ofcoverage as outlined above. 
Members shall have the right to choose among the various plans offered during each open enrollment period which shall take place on no Jess than an annual basis for each. 
Section 6. Between the date of this Award and October 31, 2013, the parties, through their respective representatives on this arbitration panel, shall reach agreement on the parameters ofa disease management program which shall include (a) annual health risk assessments and biometric screenings (height, weight, blood pressure, non-fasting cholesterol and glucose level) for members; and (b) health coaching and health management for participants at risk for serious and/or chronic diseases and conditions. Ifthe parties are unable to agree upon the parameters of such a program by October 31, 2013, the Panel shall reconvene to establish the parameters of such a program. 
The program shall be communicated to members at least 60 days in advance of the effective date ofthe program (with a target start date within the first halfofcalendar year 2014). 
The current health reimbursement arrangement (HRA) shall continue in effect with a base annual (calendar year) Commonwealth contribution of $300 per member. However, member participation in the disease management program (completion of health risk assessment and 
Ist 30th
biometric screening between January and April of each year after program implementation) and compliance with health coaching and counseling (where indicated) shall earn the member an additional HRA contribution of$50 in the following calendar year. 
20 
Should a member fail either to (a) complete the annual health risk assessment and biometric screening by the required deadlines in each applicable calendar year (after initiation of the program), or (b) participate in health coach/counseling when required to do so under the disease management program, the member shall lose $50 of the next calendar year's HRA contribution. 
ARTICLE 20 PRESCRIPTION DRUG PLAN* 
Section 1. a. The Commonwealth shall continue to provide the following prescription drug benefits to members and their eligible dependents: Drugs which by State or Federal law may be purchased only by prescription, insulin when written on a prescription form, oral contraceptives, and allergy extracts or antigens when not dispensed and administered by the same physician and drugs that are prescribed to treat injuries that members may incur as a direct result ofPennsylvania State Police employment. 
The co-payments for all prescriptions covered by this program shall be: 
Retail -30 day supply Generic -$5 Preferred Brand -$1 O Non-Preferred Brand -$15 
Mail Order -90 day supply Generic -$10 
Preferred Brand -$20 
Non-Preferred Brand -$30 
In addition, medical necessity and mandatory generic features will be added to the program. 
The Commonwealth shall pay the cost ofthe coverage as outlined above. 
b. Effective August 1, 2013, the current prescription drug program shall be changed: 
(
1) to provide coverage only for prescription drugs and supplies that are necessary to treat medical conditions and to exclude prescription drugs and supplies to treat lifestyle and cosmetic conditions; 

(2) 
to limit mail order prescriptions to a 90-day supply, rather than 180-day supply; and (3) to require dispensing ofgeneric drugs where (a) a chemically-equivalent generic drug is available in the place of a brand name drug and (b) the prescribing physician has indicated on the prescription that substitution of a generic drug is permissible. If the prescribing physician has indicated that substitution of a generic drug is permissible and the member/patient requests that the brand name drug be dispensed, the member/patient shall be responsible for the brand name drug copayment as well as an ancillary charge equal to the difference between the ingredient cost of the brand name drug and the generic drug. 


Section 2. The Commonwealth shall have the right to implement the specialty phannaceutical program administered by Express Scripts, Inc., currently referred to as .. CuraScript." Pursuant to this program, all prescriptions identified as a specialty pharmacy prescription under the CuraScript program will be referred to and filled by a CuraScript facility. Further, as part of the CuraScript program, members may be contacted by CuraScript representatives, by way of example only, to conduct health coaching, to inquire about the effectiveness of medications, to assess side-effects, to monitor member progress, or to arrange for the delivery ofmedications. 
ARTICLE21 VISION CARE PLAN * 
The Commonwealth shall provide the following vision care benefits to members and their eligible dependents: eye exams at 100% UCR, single vision lenses at $22, bifocal lenses at $36, bifocal lenses at $57, aphakic lenses at $80, medically necessary hard contacts at $100, medically necessary soft contacts at $150, cosmetic contacts at $52 and frames at $30. Dependents under age 19 are eligible for examination and lenses once during a 12-month period. Members and dependents 19 and older are eligible for examination and lenses once during a 24-month period. Members and dependents ofany age are eligible for one set of frames in any 24-month period. 
The Commonwealth shall pay the cost ofthe coverage as outlined above. 
ARTICLE22 DENT AL CARE PLAN * 
The Commonwealth shall continue to provide members and their eligible dependents with a dental care plan at I 00% UCR for basic diagnostic and preventive work, restorations, endodontics, periodontics, oral surgery, prosthodontics and orthodontics. Effective January 1, 2009, the Commonwealth will pay 70% ofUCR for orthodontics, and members and their eligible dependents will be subject to a coinsurance rate of 30%. Also effective January I, 2009, the orthodontic lifetime maximum amount payable for dependent children shall be $1250. 
The Commonwealth shall pay the entire cost ofcoverage as outlined above. 
ARTICLE23 HEALTH REIMBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENT * 
All members shall be enrolled in a Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) in the amount of $250 per calendar year per member. The HRA may be used to pay for medical expenses that are eligible under Section 213 of the Internal Revenue Code that were incurred by the member or any dependent who was covered under the member's health and/or supplemental benefits at the time the claim was incurred. Unused balances in the HRA will carry forward into the next calendar year. Upon termination of employment for reasons other than disciplinary discharge, former members may continue to submit claims until all unused balances in their HRA are used. The account shall be administered by the Commonwealth or by a third-party administrator selected at the Commonwealth discretion. 
Effective January 1, 2009, the annual HRA amount shall be increased to $300 per year and shall remain at that amount for the balance ofthe term of the agreement. 
Those members who chose to remain in the Indemnity Plan shall not be eligible to submit for reimbursement to the HRA those expenses that would have been covered under the now eliminated Doctor Office Visit Plan (formerly Article 23). 
ARTICLE24 EMERGENCY COUNSELING PLAN * 
Section I. The Commonwealth shall provide members who chose to participate in the Indemnity Program and their eligible dependents with emergency mental health psychotherapy services. 
Section 2. This benefit provides 12 medically necessary psychotherapy visits for each member and each eligible dependent per contract year. A member or dependent may use a licensed psychologist or psychiatrist of his/her choice and claims will be processed under the following conditions: 
a Ifa participating provider is chosen, payment will be made in full and the member or dependent will have no out-of-pocket expenses. 
b. 
If a non-participating provider is chosen, the member or dependent could experience some out-of-pocket expenses. The difference between the provider's charge and the Blue Shield allowance will not be eligible under Major Medical. 

c. 
The medical plan has the right to investigate claims and only those deemed medically necessary will be covered. 


d. Psychiatric evaluation services will not be covered. 
Payment shall not be made under the ECP for visits covered under Workers' Compensation. 
* For a complete description of these benefits, including their limitations, exclusions and maximums, refer to the State Police Health Benefits Program Handbook 
ARTICLE25 RETIREMENT 
Section 1. All medical, dental and prescription (except as provided in Section 2 below) coverage in effect at the time ofretirement are to continue until the death of the retiring member, provided the member retires under the following conditions: 
a. 
Superannuation retirement (excluding vestees) or retirement with at least 25 years ofservice. 

b. 
Disability retirement. 

c. 
Retirement with at least 20 but less than 25 years of service, with at least 10 years of enlisted service with State Police (Military time, civilian service and service with another agency are not considered service with the State Police). 


Section 2. For members who retire after July 1, 1995, the Retiree Major Medical Program shall not provide prescription drug benefits. Those benefits shall be provided solely by the prescription drug program carried into retirement. 
Section 3. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, a member, regardless of age, may also retire on or after July 1, 1989 with all health benefits that are currently carried into retirement under the following conditions: 
a. 
At 50% ofthe highest year salary after 20 years ofservice; or 

b. 
At 75% ofthe highest year salary after 25 years ofservice. 


ARTICLE26 DISClPLINE 
Section 1. Probationary Period 
All Troopers shall serve a probationary period of 18 months from the date of original enlistment, during which time they may be dismissed by the Commissioner for violations of rules and regulations, incompetency, and inefficiency without action ofa Court-Martial Board, the right ofappeal to a civil court, or the grievance procedure. 
Section 2. Suspension Without Pay 
A member shall not be suspended without pay unless the conduct falls within the purview of the Governor's Code of Conduct or the member is notified of dismissal after selecting the grievance procedure or recommendation for probationary review. 
In disciplinary cases that could reasonably be construed to result in termination other than those referenced in the above paragraph, the Department shall limit suspensions without pay pending investigation ofthe conduct to no more than 20 working days. If, upon expiration ofthe 20 working day period of suspension without pay, the Department has not completed its investigation, the member shall be placed on suspension with pay, be returned to restricted duty status, and/or be temporarily reassigned or transferred to a reasonably situated station or assignment, until such time as the Notice of Disciplinary Penalty has been issued. The Department, at its discretion, may elect which of these options to utilize in any given case. The use of these options by the Department shall not prevent subsequent disciplinary action from being taken, and any subsequent disciplinary action shall not constitute double jeopardy; nor shall the use ofthese options be used as a defense in any subsequent disciplinary proceeding. 
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to impose temporal or other limits on the Department's right to impose suspension without pay as a form ofdisciplinary penalty. 
Section 3. Fringe Benefits During Suspension Without Pay 
A member suspended without pay who has not been charged with a felony or misdemeanor under the laws of the United States, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, any other state(s) of the United States, and/or subdivisions thereof, shall continue to receive the benefits provided under the State Police Health Program, the State Police Supplemental Benefits Program, and the Group Life Insurance Program during the period ofsuspension until such time as the cost ofthe benefits paid equals the amount of the member's accumulated retirement deductions and interest, plus the amount ofall eligible leave payouts; at such time, the above benefits will terminate. Ifthe member elects not to file a grievance, or the grievance is denied wholly or in part, for any reason, the member shall reimburse the Commonwealth for the cost ofthe benefits within 90 days of the final disposition or upon separation from the Department, whichever shall occur sooner. The member 
will be required to repay the Commonwealth for the cost ofsuch benefits as follows: 
a. 
For the State Police Health Program and the State Police Supplemental Benefits Program, the member will pay the monthly individual or multiparty premium that is charged to COBRA subscribers during the period ofthe suspension, minus the 2% administrative charge; 

b. 
For the Group Life Insurance Program, the member will pay the monthly contribution rate that the Agency would have paid during the period ofsuspension. 


Such premiums will be paid whether or not any actual claims were incurred during the period ofthe suspension. 
Suspensions ofmembers who have been charged criminally with misdemeanors or felonies under the laws of the United States, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, any other state(s) of the United States, and/or subdivisions thereof, shall be reviewed by the Office ofAdministration on a case-by-case basis, in consultation with the PSTA and the Department, as necessary, to determine whether benefits will continue in accordance with the provisions of this Section. A decision will be rendered as soon as possible, but not later than 20 working days from the date the Department is notified of the filing of charges in the case of a member who has been charged criminally with a felony or work-related misdemeanor and not later than 20 working days from the date the Department notifies the member that the member is being suspended in the case ofa member who has been charged criminally with a non work-related misdemeanor. If the aforementioned time limits are exceeded, benefits will continue in accordance with the provisions of this Section. The determination of the Office of Administration will not be subject to the grievance and arbitration procedures. 
Benefits during suspensions ofone full pay period or less shall be processed in accordance with the current practice. 
Section 4. Court-Martial Board 
Court-martial proceedings shall provide that the accused may name, or designate the PSTA to name, one ofthe three members ofthe Court-Martial Board. 
Section 5. Rights 
a. A member shall be advised oftheir Garrity/Miranda Rights when applicable. 
b. 
A member who is the subject of an administrative inquiry or internal investigation shall be advised of and upon request, be afforded PST A representation at any interview, predisposition conference, DAR issuance, or any hearing. 

c. 
Absent exigent circumstances, the member shall receive reasonable notice to arrange for PST A representation and the member shall be required to arrange such representation within a reasonable time period. However, this does not give the interviewee the right to a specific representative, only to one that is nearest and most readily available. 

d. 
Any member who is interviewed in regards to an investigation and has reason to believe that their statements could result in administrative action being taken against them, shall be afforded PST A representation ifrequested. 

e. 
A member, prior to the issuance of a DAR, shall be afforded the rights under Article 28, Section 2 ofthe grievance procedure. 

f. 
If a tape recording is made by the interviewer, a copy shall be furnished to the member upon written request within 15 working days of the completion of the interview of the subject of the investigation. In cases involving multiple subjects of investigation, the tape recording shall be furnished within 15 working days after the last interview is completed. During tape recorded interviews, members shall also be permitted to simultaneously tape record the interview consistent with those procedures jointly agreed to between the parties. 

g. 
Upon the issuance of a DAR, the PST A shall be given all information, evidence, reports and statements obtained by the Department related to the charge or charges; provided, however, that the Department shall not be obligated to tum over any information, evidence, report or statement that may compromise, interfere with, or otherwise impede any other investigation by another law enforcement agency or the Pennsylvania State Police, including for example the names ofconfidential witnesses. 


No later than 15 calendar days prior to any arbitration hearing, the Commonwealth and the Union shall exchange ( l) all available information, evidence and all complete statements, to the extent created in the course of preparing the case, for any person who may testify; and (2) the names of all persons who will testify including a statement of the subject matter of each witness's testimony. 
If any of the above has not been exchanged, it may not be used by the non-producing party at the hearing; provided, however, that information which was not available or was discovered after the deadline for exchange of information may be used if it has been provided to the other party as soon as possible after discovery. 
Section 6. Required Correspondence 
When requested a member who is involved in or witness to an incident or is the subject ofa complaint allegation, other than allegations ofcriminal conduct, shall record all the known facts of the involved incident in writing and direct it to their Commanding Officer or other designated authority. The request for all required correspondence shall be made to the member prior to any interview. Absent exigent circumstances, a member will be provided two working days to submit said correspondence. If further information/ clarification is subsequently required, the member shall be given specific questions to be answered. 
Section 7. Statute of Limitations 
[n cases of alleged criminal conduct, cases which could reasonably be construed to give rise to court-martial proceedings, alleged violations ofthe Governor's Code ofConduct, or cases in which a prosecutorial determination is sought, the Department shall complete its investigation and the member advised of the Troop Commander/Bureau Director's notice of administrative findings within 120 calendar days. The 120 calendar days will commence on the date the member is notified ofthe complaint, except as provided below: 
a. 
ln cases involving alleged criminal conduct or requests for a prosecutorial determination, the notice of administrative findings shall be issued within 90 calendar days from the date the Department receives written notice from the member of the disposition/adjudication of the criminal charge or the date the Department receives the prosecutorial determination. 

b. 
In all other cases the Department shall complete its investigation and the member advised of the Troop Commander/Bureau Director's notice of administrative findings within 120 calendar days of the date the Department is notified of the complaint. 

c. 
ln court-martial cases the member shall be notified of the adjudicated penalty within 45 calendar days ofthe member's selection ofthe grievance procedure. 

(
1) The Department Disciplinary Officer shall seek to issue a Notice of Disciplinary Penalty, ifany, in all non-court-martial cases within sixty (60) calendar days of issuance of the DAR, but in no case shall such notice be issued more than ninety (90) calendar days from issuance of the DAR. 

(2) 
The Department Disciplinary Officer shall seek to issue a Notice of Disciplinary Penalty, if any, in all court-martial cases within ninety (90) calendar days of issuance of the DAR, but in no case shall such notice be issued more than 120 calendar days from issuance ofthe DAR. 



d. 
If the aforementioned time limits are not met, no discipline in the form of a suspension without pay may be initiated. However, the time limits may be waived by the Department upon a showing ofjust cause or by mutual agreement of both parties. 


Except in cases alleging criminal conduct or cases which give rise to court-martial proceedings, no disciplinary action consisting of a suspension without pay shall be imposed for violations of Department rules and regulations which are discovered more than one year after the date of occurrence unless mandated by the Governor's Code ofConduct. This paragraph shall not apply upon a showing ofproof that the member acted to prevent such discovery. 
Section 8. Purging ofFiles 
If a member is found not guilty of the charges, any information contained in the member's official personnel folder and Troop/Bureau personnel file shall be purged within 30 days of the findings and all purged material returned to the member. Unfounded, not sustained, policy void, or withdrawn investigations shall not be used for consideration in evaluations or specialized position selections. 
All other purging shall be in accordance with established practice. 
Section 9. Receipt ofComplaints 
An investigator, upon being assigned to conduct an internal investigation as the result of a citizen complaint, shall complete a complaint verification and shall request the complainant's signature attesting to the veracity of the complaint as set forth. Except in cases where criminal conduct is alleged or cases which could reasonably be construed to give rise to court-martial proceedings as determined by the Disciplinary Officer, no disciplinary charges shall be brought, nor shall the Department treat any member as subject to disciplinary charges, prior to either a signed verification of allegations against the member or in the absence of a signed verification, evidence corroborating the allegations 
Section 10. Outside Employment 
A member who is suspended without pay and submits a Request for Approval of Supplementary Employment will be notified of the approval or denial within three working days of the Department's receipt ofany such request. The member may submit the request directly to the Director, Bureau ofHuman Resources by the most expedient means available; e.g., FAX, express mail, etc. The Department's reply shall be sent to the PST A by the most expedient means available. Ifthe Department fails to respond to the PST A within the time limitations, the member's request shall be considered approved. 
A member who has a previously approved Request for Supplementary Employment, and is suspended without pay, may engage in the approved supplementary employment, and except as required by law, shall not be required to offset reimbursement ifthe member is found not guilty of all charges. 
Section 11. Definitions 
The term member shall include probationary Troopers except where excluded. 
Section 12. Discipline Standards 
Disciplinary standards regarding termination of employment for certain specified offenses are contained in Appendix E. 
ARTICLE 27 LEGAL COUNSEL 
Section 1. Ifa member is charged with a criminal action as a result of the member's having acted within the scope and responsibility of his/her office, he/she shall select local counsel in consultation with his/her Commanding Officer. The Commonwealth shall pay for the fees of such counsel to the extent the fees are in line with prevailing rates in the area. 
Section 2. Ifa member is a defendant in a civil suit as a result ofthe member's having acted within the scope and responsibility of his/her office, the Commonwealth shall immediately furnish counsel and defend the member. 
Section 3. The Commonwealth shall be responsible for judgments rendered against the member in job-related suits where the member has acted within the scope and responsibility of his/her office. 
Section 4. ln order to expedite the determination contained in this section, arbitrations regarding a dispute under this Article shall be determined pursuant to the labor arbitration rules of the American Arbitration Association with lists provided in each case by the Philadelphia office of the American Arbitration Association. 
ARTICLE28 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 
Section 1. Scope 
Grievances are limited to matters involving interpretation of this Agreement including all matters of discipline, and grant or termination of Heart & Lung Act benefits, compensation and reimbursement under FR 4-1, Loss ofor Damage to State Property and Equipment ifin excess of $250, and FR 5-1, Travel and Subsistence. 
Section 2. Rights 
a. Prior to the issuance of a DAR to a member at the Troop/Bureau level, the Troop Commander/Bureau Director will notify the member in writing of the pending action and furnish the member with a summary of any justification or information pertaining solely to the member, including but not limited to statements of all witnesses as well as copies of any test results being considered for use in the issuance ofthe proposed DAR. 
Exception: The names ofconfidential witnesses shall not be released. 
b. 
Upon notification the member will have three working days to request a meeting with the Troop Commander/Bureau Director. During this meeting, the member shall provide all known information (such as but not limited to additional names of witnesses or other specifics) which might mitigate or alter the decision to issue the DAR. The member shall be permitted local PST A representation for such meetings, if so desired. The member assumes responsibility for arranging such representation within 24 hours. 

c. 
The member and/or PST A representative may, during this meeting, take notes and ask questions to determine the accuracy and relevancy of the information presented. The meeting will be held within five working days ofthe member's request. 


Section 3. Grievance Steps 
STEP 1. The member, either alone or accompanied by a PST A representative, or the PSTA where entitled, shall present the grievance in writing to the member's Troop Commander/Bureau Director within 1S calendar days of its occurrence or knowledge of its occurrence. 
Within 10 calendar days, the Troop Commander/Bureau Director or his/her designee shall conduct a hearing and provide a written STEP 1 decision to the member or the PST A representative. 
If additional information is provided by the member or the PST A representative, the time limits may be extended an additional five calendar days to review or further investigate the data. Prior to the grievance submission to STEP 2, the grievance may be amended by the member or the PST A representative. 
A member may appeal discipline beginning at STEP 2 of the grievance procedure, within 15 calendar days of the notice of discipline the member receives from the Disciplinary Officer. The grievance must be presented in writing and received or postmarked to the Office of Administration, Bureau of Labor Relations within the 15 calendar day period to be considered timely. 
STEP 2. In the event the grievance has not been satisfactorily resolved in STEP 1, written appeal, if made, shall be by the member or PST A to the Office of Administration, Bureau of Labor Relations, 404 Finance Building, Harrisburg, PA 17120. The written appeal shall be made and postmarked within five calendar days of the Troop Commander's/Bureau Director's STEP 1 written decision. The written appeal to STEP 2 shall contain a copy ofthe grievance and a copy ofthe STEP I decision. Discipline grieved directly to STEP 2 shall also include a copy ofthe grievant's DAR, the grievant's response, if applicable, notification of disciplinary action, the grievant's proposed witnesses and all other supporting documents. A copy will also be sent to the PSTA President, 3625 Vartan Way, Harrisburg, PA 17110. 
Upon receipt of the grievance at STEP 2, either the representative from the Bureau of Labor Relations or the PST A Grievance Board Chairman shall schedule a grievance committee meeting consisting of members from the Employer (no more than five) and the PSTA Grievance Board (no more than five). The joint committee shall meet at least one day per month, unless the parties mutually agree otherwise. 
The grievance committee shall meet for the purpose of reviewing the grievance(s) previously denied in writing at STEP I and appealed to STEP 2 and matters ofdiscipline grieved directly to STEP 2. A list of grievances to be discussed shall be sent to the Bureau of Labor Relations' representative and the Director, Bureau of Human Resources, Pennsylvania State Police by the PST A Grievance Board Chairman, within seven calendar days, when possible, prior to the grievance committee meeting. 
STEP 3. If the grievance is not satisfactorily resolved by the grievance committee at STEP 2, the grievance may be scheduled for arbitration by the PST A Grievance Board Chairman by serving upon the Bureau of Labor Relations' representative notice, within 10 calendar days of the grievance committee meeting, of its intent to proceed to arbitration. The Bureau of Labor Relations representative and the PST A Grievance Board Chairman shall determine hearing dates and arbitrator availability. 
The Employer's decision at STEP 1 and the Committee's decision at STEP 2 shall not be used as a precedent for any subsequent case. 
Section 4. Grievance Processing 
An aggrieved member and PST A representative, if member, and a reasonable number of witnesses, when required, shall be granted reasonable time during working hours, if required, to process grievances in accordance with this Article without loss ofpay or leave time. 
Section 5. PST A Representation 
The PSTA must have an opportunity to appear with the grievant at all steps of the grievance procedure. Subsequent to the issuance ofthe Disciplinary Officer's letter ofadjudication the PSTA shall have the right to investigate all issues not incorporated within an investigation against a member, provided the issue has been brought to the attention ofthe Department and the Department chooses not to investigate the issue. Such follow-up investigation shall occur during off-duty hours, a member's badge ofoffice shall not be used, and any expenses incurred therewith shall be borne exclusively by the PST A. 
Section 6. Grievance Resolution 
The PST A Grievance Board shall have the authority to settle or withdraw any grievance which does not have merit, does not comply with the time frames stated previously above, or does not comply with the guidelines established by the PSTA. 
Section 7. Arbitrator and Site Selection 
Five neutral arbitrators are to be selected by the parties jointly to hear cases in the above procedure. 
Either party may, at any time, remove a neutral arbitrator, selected by the parties, after giving the other party at least 15 days notice. 
When a vacancy exists on the list of arbitrators, the parties should attempt to agree on a replacement within 10 calendar days. If the parties cannot agree, the parties shall request the American Arbitration Association to submit a list of seven arbitrators. Upon receipt ofsuch list, the parties shall alternately strike until one arbitrator needed to fill a vacancy remains. A new list shall be requested from the American Arbitration Association for each arbitrator to be selected. Only one arbitrator is to be selected from each list. The Commonwealth shall strike first. 
The parties may mutually agree to schedule a hearing at a location agreeable to both. For discipline grievances, the hearing site will be at a neutral location within the geographical area of the Troop where the grievance arose, unless mutually agreed otherwise. 
When the parties cannot agree to a hearing location due to a disagreement over the nature ofthe case, then the hearing site will be decided by the neutral arbitrator. 
Section 8. Arbitrator Responsibility 
Issues concerning timeliness or procedurally defective cases or matters on arbitrability will be decided prior to hearing the merits of the grievance. The arbitrator shall neither add to, subtract from, nor modify the provisions ofthis Agreement or ofthe arbitration awards. The arbitrator shall confine himselfi'herself to the precise issue submitted for arbitration and shall have no authority to determine any other issues not so submitted to him/her. In those matters involving discipline for actions specifically set forth in Article 26, Section 12, Appendix E, Subsections [I] -[ 12], the arbitrator shall be limited to determining just cause and may not alter the penalty imposed by the Department. 
The decision ofthe arbitrator shall be final and binding on both parties. The arbitrator shall be requested to issue his/her decision within 30 days after the record is closed, but not to exceed 60 days. 
If briefs are to be submitted, they must be postmarked within 15 working days of the hearing or the arbitrator shall decide the case without the late party's brief. 
All ofthe time limits contained in the Article may be extended by mutual agreement. Ifthe Commonwealth fails to respond in a timely manner in any step of the grievance procedure, the grievant and/or the PST A may process the grievance to the next Step in the procedure. 
All fees and expenses ofthe arbitrator shall be divided equally between the parties. Each party shall bear the cost ofpreparing and presenting its own case. Either party desiring a record of the proceedings shall pay for the record and make a copy available without charge to the arbitrator. 
Section 9. Heart and Lung Claims 
Matters dealing with Heart & Lung shall be addressed in AR 4-4 as agreed to. Subsequent changes in AR 4-4 Heart & Lung Procedures shall be subject to bargaining. Grievances arising from the grant or termination of Heart & Lung Act benefits shall be subject to the Grievance Procedure specified in this Article. 
Section 10. Reimbursement/Compensation Issues 
All issues dealing with the application ofcompensation and reimbursement under FR 4-1, Loss ofor Damage to State Property or Equipment, and FR 5-l, Travel & Subsistence, as presently written or modified by the Department, shall be submitted to a Board made up of one representative from the Department, one from the Office of Administration and one from the PSTA. The findings of the Board shall be final and binding for Loss of or Damage to State Property or Equipment involving $250 or less. In all other cases arising under this Section, the decision of the Board shall be subject to the Grievance Procedure specified in this Article, except that grievances should be submitted directly to Step 2. 
It is understood by the parties that the Board/ Arbitrator shall have no authority to amend 
the Commonwealth's travel regulations. 
Section 11. Grievance/Court-Martial Procedure Selection 
In the event a member is accused of an offense that would otherwise be subject to court-martial proceedings under Article 26, he/she shall be advised as follows: 
Subsequent to the issuance of a DAR by the Troop Commander, if the Disciplinary Officer, with the concurrence of the Deputy Commissioner of Administration and Professional Responsibility, directs that the member be court-martialed, the following shall apply for the selection ofeither court-martial procedure or grievance procedure: 
a. 
The member will receive written notice (form) that he/she may elect to challenge the accusation either through the court-martial procedure or the grievance procedure within seven calendar days. When made, the election shall be irrevocable. If not made in a timely manner, it shall be conclusively presumed that the member has elected the grievance procedure. 

b. 
The written notice (form) will state no matter which procedure the member selects, he/she is subject to disciplinary action up to and including but not limited to dismissal, transfer, reduction in rank and/or potential suspension in excess of30 days. 

c. 
Ifthe member selects the court-martial procedure, a request will be made of the Governor to convene such proceedings at which time charges and specifications will be issued, in writing, to the member. 

d. 
If the member selects the grievance procedure, the Commissioner will determine the appropriate penalty, and a written notice will be issued to the member stating the disciplinary action to be taken and the underlying facts in support thereof in accordance with the timeframes in Article 26, Section 7 c. (2). After receiving the Commissioner's decision the normal grievance procedure will then apply. 


Section 12. Penalty Imposition 
Subject to the provisions of Article 26, Section 5, Subsection g, a penalty of suspension without pay shall be implemented at any point in time following receipt of the Notice of Disciplinary Penalty by the member accused of misconduct. The implementation of the penalty can be delayed upon mutual agreement ofthe parties. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of Sections 11 and 12 herein above, where removal from duty is required at any time due to the nature of the offense, the Department may suspend a member in accordance with Article 26, Section 2. 
Section 13. Administrative Leave 
Administrative leave shall be for the time that coincides with the grievant's or witnesses' work schedule, not to exceed a full shift. On the day of the hearing, the grievant/witness shall be scheduled on a day shift (a shift for which shift differential is not paid). For this accommodation, no overtime can be charged by the grievant/witness in respect to other sections ofthis contract. 
A grievant and/or witnesses, when required to travel a distance exceeding 100 miles from his/her regular station to the arbitration site, shall not be required to work a shift commencing after 
8:00 a.m. the day prior to the arbitration hearing date unless a clear and present danger/emergency exists. 
All witnesses granted administrative leave time shall be required to testify unless excused mutually by the parties. 
Requests for administrative leave shall be presented in writing to the Office of Administration, Bureau of Labor Relations, at least 14 days prior to the arbitration hearing date, except for unforeseen circumstances, in which case leave shall not be unreasonably denied. 
Up to five members appointed by the PST A to serve on the Grievance Board shall receive sufficient time to review grievances and attend STEP 2 Grievance Committee meetings without loss ofleave or compensation. It is agreed that all members appointed by the PSTA shall be active members. 
Section 14. Annual Review 
The Commonwealth and the PSTA shall meet yearly to review the grievance procedure. The procedure can be modified at any time by agreement between the parties. 
Section 15. Agreement 
The foregoing represents the parties' entire agreement with regard to Article 28, Grievance Procedure, and any previous side-letters concerning this Grievance Procedure Article are no longer in effect. 
Section 16. Definitions 
The term member shall include probationary Troopers except where excluded. 
Section 17. Expedited Arbitration Procedure 
In any case where (I) a disciplinary penalty has been imposed on a member following service of a Notice of Disciplinary Penalty, and (2) the PST A has made a written demand for arbitration to the Commonwealth's Bureau of Labor Relations within 10 calendar days of service of the Notice upon the PST A, the matter shall be heard before an arbitrator or a court martial board within 61 calendar days following service of the Notice. In the event the matter is not heard within that time period, and the delay is not attributable to the PSTA or the member, the penalty must be rescinded until such time as an arbitrator sustains the penalty. Delays attributable to the member or PST A, including the failure to make a demand for or to schedule the arbitration, shall not result in rescission of the penalty. Should the PST A not make a written demand for arbitration within the ten day time period, the right to arbitration shall be deemed to have been waived. 
To implement the 61 day requirement, the parties shall immediately appoint a panel of arbitrators to be designated as the Disciplinary Arbitration Panel. The appointments shall be made in accordance with Section 7 of this Article. The Disciplinary Arbitration Panel shall consist of not less than seven arbitrators, which number may be expanded as the parties deem necessary to satisfy the sixty-one day requirement. Each arbitrator shall provide the parties with a minimum of two dates per every calendar month. Arbitrators appointed to the Disciplinary Arbitration Panel shall serve two-year terms, but in no event shall an arbitrator be removed from the Disciplinary Arbitration Panel without the mutual concurrence of the parties, prior to a date 24 months after the arbitrator's last appointment to the Panel. An arbitrator sitting on the Panel shall render his or her decision within IO calendar days of the close of the hearing. Written summations shall not be accepted from either party without the consent of the other. Should written summations be submitted, they shall be received within 10 days ofthe hearing, at which point the hearing will be deemed closed. In the event that notes of testimony are taken by a reporter, the parties shall direct that the notes be transcribed and forwarded to the parties and the arbitrator on an expedited basis and in no event more than 48 hours after the close of the evidentiary hearing. A written opinion may be required of the arbitrator by either party and, if required, shall be submitted within 30 calendar days ofthe close ofthe hearing. 
ARTICLE29 ADMINISTRATIVE LEA VE 
Section 1. For any interest arbitration, contract negotiation or preparation therefore under Act 111, all members of the PSTA negotiating committee (limited to a maximum of 15 persons) and necessary witnesses shall have time off with pay (unless a present or threatened emergency requires their services) as is reasonably necessary to complete the foregoing (including travel time). Members shall provide reasonable notice of the request for such leave to the Employer. Travel time shall be included in the requests. 
Section 2. The President ofthe Pennsylvania State Troopers Association or his designee shall have reasonable time off to handle and process grievances or other labor relations matters with representatives of the Commonwealth. The President or his designee and necessary witnesses shall be permitted to use administrative leave to attend a hearing before the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board. Any witnesses must actually testify before the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board or be excused from testifying by mutual agreement. A witness, when required to travel a distance exceeding I 00 miles from his/her regular station to the site of the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board hearing, shall not be required to work a shift commencing after 8:00 a.m. the day prior to the hearing date unless a clear and present danger/emergency exists. 
Section 3. No more than three duly elected representatives (which shall include officers and committee members) of each Fraternal Order of Police Lodge will be permitted to attend three two-day "Round Robins" in the year, without loss of pay, plus one-half day travel for distances exceeding one-hundred (100) miles, when verified on the request by the Troop Commander. 
Section 4. A committee (numbering no more than seven members) may be designated by the Pennsylvania State Troopers Association to meet two times a year with the State Police Administration to discuss the Field Regulations Manual. The purpose of the meeting shall be to provide the State Police Administration with information and suggestions concerning Field Regulations. The proper utilization of this information is a matter for the State Police Administration to determine. 
ARTICLE30 UNION BUSINESS 
Upon request by the PSTA, Union officers shall be released from duty. Union officers released from duty pursuant to State law shall be paid by the Commonwealth at the amount designated by the PST A Board of Directors, not to exceed the rate of the highest ranking member of the bargaining unit with appropriate longevity. Any amount paid by the Commonwealth, including the cost of all benefits, shall be reimbursed by the PST A to the Commonwealth in accordance with law. 
ARTICLE 31 PERSONNEL FILES 
Members shall have access to their personnel files in accordance with the State Police Administrative Regulation 4-8. 
ARTICLE 32 CLOTHING MAINTENANCE 
An allowance of $500 is granted to all members (uniformed and non-uniformed) for the purpose of clothing maintenance. Effective July 1, 2011, the clothing maintenance allowance shall be $600. This allowance is in addition to clothing benefits now enjoyed by members. Payment is to be made at the discretion ofthe Commonwealth except that at least one-half is to be paid during the first six months ofthe contract year. 
ARTICLE 33 OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT 
Section 1. Members will be permitted to engage in outside employment under appropriate circumstances. Outside employment shall not be limited to hardship cases and may take place provided: 
a. 
Prior authorization is obtained. 

b. 
The scope ofemployment does not demean the image ofthe Pennsylvania State Police. 

c. 
There is no conflict with the member's primary duties. 

d. 
The total amount ofemployment does not interfere with the member's ability to perform his/her duties properly. 


Section 2. Ifa member submits a request for authorization to engage in outside employment, the State Police Administration shall endeavor to respond to the request within one week. Ifthe member does not receive a reply within 30 days, the request shall be deemed to be granted. 
ARTICLE 34 REDUCTION IN FORCE 
Section 1. In the event ofa reduction in force, members will be laid offin accordance with the inverse order ofseniority on the basis ofrank. Ifan officer (Corporal or above) is subject to layoff, the person with the least seniority in that rank will be laid off first. That officer will then be permitted to use his/her time as an officer for bumping into a lower officer classification. On the basis of his/her Service Seniority he/she may bump into the rank of Trooper. The least senior Trooper will then be laid off. Recall will be in the inverse order ofthe layoff. This provision must be administered in accordance with any judicially imposed requirements. 
Section 2. Service Seniority for the purpose of layoff shall be computed as continuous service from the date of enlistment. Where two or more persons have the same date of enlistment, the seniority rank will be on the basis ofthe highest to lowest enlistment scores. 
ARTICLE35 MEMBER TREATMENT 
Section I. The Employer agrees not to engage in or permit discrimination or harassment against any member on the basis of race, creed, color, ancestry, sex, marital status, age, national origin, disability, union membership, union activity or political affiliation. 
Section 2. Incidents which are at variance with this principle may be appealed through the grievance and arbitration procedure. In cases of alleged harassment, the only remedy available to the arbitrator shall be a cease and desist award. 
If a subsequent alleged harassment arbitration involving the same parties results in a cease and desist award, the member who has committed the act of harassment shall be subject to progressive discipline by the Department. Further substantiated acts ofharassment shall result in more severe discipline. 
ARTICLE36 TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENT 
When a member is temporarily assigned the duties ofa higher rank for five days or more in any calendar quarter, then the member shall receive, retroactive to the time the assignment took place, the difference between his/her regular rate of pay and the rate he/she would receive had he/she been promoted to that rank. This amount will be in addition to the member's regular rate of pay. If the member works the majority ofhours on a shift, it shall be considered as a whole day at the higher rank. 
For the purpose of this Article, the calendar quarters shall be defined as beginning with the first full pay period in January through March 31, April I through June 30, July I through September 30, and October I through the last full pay period of the leave calendar year, which is the pay period that includes December 31. 
ARTICLE 37 SPECIALIZED POSITIONS AND TRAINING 
Section 1. Definitions 
a. 
For the purpose of this Article, a specialized position is one designated on Troop/Bureau rosters as of January 1, 1997 which requires special training or ability that is not required for basic patrol unit assignments whether the specialized position assignment is performed on a permanent or part time basis. 

b. 
Exclusions to this Article are those specialized positions/assignments offered to all members on a rotational basis, Areaffroop/Section/Station Commanders, Bureau/Division Directors, Regional Commissioned Officers, positions under the Executive and Administrative office, and positions under the Bureau of Integrity and Professional Standards. Also included in these exclusions are those members assigned to Executive Services. 


Section 2. Posting 
a. Prior to posting a Specialized Position Vacancy, the Troop Commander/Bureau Director has the option to offer the vacancy to members already serving in that same specialty within the Troop/Bureau. The offer shall be made to all incumbents within the specialty via an email from the Troop Commander/Bureau Director or designee. Incumbents will be given seven 
(7) calendar days to respond by submitting a transfer request for the vacancy. The Troop Commander/Bureau Director reserves the right to not transfer an incumbent due to operational reasons. The reasons for such action must be provided to the incumbent member(s) in writing within ten (10) calendar days of the Troop Commander's/Bureau Director's decision. In such cases, the vacancy shall be posted in accordance with the provisions ofSection 2.d. 
If the transfer option is used and more than one incumbent in that specialty within the Troop/Bureau submits a transfer request for the same vacancy, the senior member will receive the transfer. If multiple vacancies exist, choice of vacancies will be offered by seniority. Seniority for these purposes shall be the member's total time served in the specific specialty in the Troop/Bureau. Ifa tie still exists, the member who was sworn in earliest as a Trooper will be considered the most senior. Ifa tie still exists, the random number provided by the Department will be applied as a tie breaker. 
The Troop Commander/Bureau Director has the option to continue to offer any subsequent specialized position vacancies created as a result of such transfers until such time as no incumbents submit a transfer request. At that time, any remaining vacancies will be filled by posting a Circular and completing a selection process. 
The aforementioned procedure does not apply to specialized position vacancies if an incumbent Altemate(s) exist. When an incumbent Altemate(s) exists, the procedure described in Section 3.c. shall be used to fill the vacancy. 
b. 
For purposes of career development or temporary workload requirements members may be assigned by the Troop Commander/Bureau Director to a 90 day rotation into a specialized position. At the conclusion of the 90 day period, ifthe Department wishes to keep the position filled, either a new member must be assigned to a 90 day rotation or the position must be posted and filled in accordance with this Article. 

c. 
Vacancies for all specialized positions (with the exception of Section 2.a. and 2.b.) shall be posted electronically on the iNet for a period of at least 15 calendar days prior to the selection process. During this time, qualified, interested members who have completed a minimum ofthree years as an enlisted member may express their interest in the position. 

d. 
All postings shall contain a job description, any special qualifications or requirements, the skills and abilities to be evaluated and the fact that particularized judgment may be exercised. Where the appointing officer exercises particularized judgment in filling specialized positions, that judgment will not be overturned unless it is shown to have been abused or based on unlawful criteria. 

e. 
A copy of all postings shall be electronically forwarded to the PSTA at the time of posting. 


Unless there are operational reasons for not filling the position, the posted position shall be filled from among the applicants deemed qualified through the selection process. Within 30 calendar days after the completion of the selection process, PST A will be notified ifthe posted position will not be filled. 
Section 3. Eligibility 
a. 
Any member who has been suspended within one year of the posting of a specialized position or who has been removed from a specialized position in accordance with Section 7.c. of this Article shall not be eligible to apply unless a standing list is being created. When a standing list is being created, such members may apply but may not be selected until the one year period or mandatory time limit, as applicable, has expired. Members who have completed a minimum of three years as an enlisted member may express their interest in a specialized position. When a standing list is being established, members who have completed more than two years as an enlisted member may apply for the position. However, such members will not be eligible for selection from the standing list until such time as they have completed three years as an enlisted member. 

b. 
A member who has been notified that a preference transfer has been approved is not eligible to be selected for a specialized position at the Troop he/she is departing. A member may apply for a specialized position at their new Troop if the transfer effective date falls within the posting period. 

c. 
Vacancies for specialized positions with incumbent Alternates shall first be filled from members in those Alternate positions in the Troop/Bureau. Ifa single Alternate exists, no posting is necessary unless the member declines the vacancy. If multiple Alternates exist, a posting must be done (in accordance with Section 2. d.), but eligibility is restricted to current Alternates. The normal selection procedure will then be used to select one of the Alternates for the vacancy. 


If the selected Alternate works at a minimally staffed station or other operational limitations exist, release to the full time position may be delayed until the next lntertroop transfers occur. 
d. 
Members on limited duty are eligible to apply for specialized positions. However, such members must be released to full duty status by the SPMO prior to completion of the selection process. Absent a release to full duty status by this deadline, the limited duty member shall be deemed ineligible for selection. In the case ofa standing list, limited duty members will remain on the list, but will not be eligible for selection until after their release to full duty status. 

e. 
The Department shall determine the qualifications necessary for each specialized position vacancy posted through a Circular. Experience from a source outside of PSP that involves a license or certification, as well as post-secondary educational credits, may be considered when determining if an applicant meets these qualifications. Other sources of experience from outside PSP will not be considered when determining if an applicant meets these qualifications. However, such experience can be considered during the Assessment of Training and Experience component of the selection process provided the member is deemed to be otherwise qualified for the specialty in question. 


Section 4. Reduction in Position 
a. 
Removal from a specialized position in a Troop/Bureau because of a reduction of personnel in that position or elimination ofthe specialty shall be by least seniority in that specialty in the affected station, unit or work locations providing all factors are equal. 

b. Removal from a specialized position for reasons other than as stated in subsection 

a. 
above shall be for reasonable grounds. Notice of such removal shall be accompanied by a written explanation setting forth the reasons. If a member wishes to appeal such decision to remove, he/she may use the grievance and arbitration procedures set forth in Section 10 of this Article. If a removal is for disciplinary purposes, the issue in the case shall be whether the Department had just cause for removal. If a removal is for non-disciplinary purposes (for example, performance in or non-suitability for the position), the issue in the case shall be whether the Department had reasonable grounds for removal. 

c. 
When a member, who holds a specialized position, is in a status that precludes him/her from performing the duties of that position for a period of eight weeks or more ( e.g. limited duty, disability leave, sick leave, leave without pay, etc.), he/she shall be placed in an inactive status in regard to the specialized position. The member will remain in an inactive status until he/she is released to full duty status by the SPMO. The Department reserves the right to issue a Circular for an Alternate to the specialized position on a temporary basis to ensure operational efficiency. The member selected to the Alternate position will perform the specialized position duties ofthe member that was placed in an inactive status, until such time as that member is cleared by the SPMO to return to full duty status. NOTE: Circulars to fill such Alternate positions on a temporary basis shall include language confirming that assignment to the position shall end on the date the inactive member returns to full duty status and that the Alternate position will be abolished. The member assigned to the Alternate position will return to his/her previously held position/duties. In the event the member in an inactive status leaves the Department, the member selected to the Alternate position will be placed into the full time position on a permanent basis. 


Section 5. Non-Selection Notification 
Where a standing list is used, the appointing officer shall, within 30 calendar days, provide a written explanation to each ofthe members who did not qualify to be placed on the list. Where a standing list is not used, the appointing officer shall, within 30 calendar days, provide a written explanation to each ofthe non-selected members setting forth the reasons for non-selection. 
Section 6. Selection Procedure 
a A Troop Commander/Bureau Director may choose either a standing list or to post vacancies on an as-needed basis. 
b. 
When a standing list is established, it shall be posted within IO calendar days after the compiling ofthe list. The list shall stand for a period of one year or until the list is exhausted, whichever comes first. The member with the highest absolute score in the selection process shall be selected. 

c. Absolute score shall be calculated to the nearest whole number. 

d. 
Seniority will be the determining factor in tie breaking only when absolute scores are identical. 

e. 
Seniority standing for selection purposes shall be the date the member was sworn in as a Trooper when considered for a position as Trooper, Trooper/Corporal or Trooper/Corporal/Sergeant. For postings requiring rank or ranks higher than Trooper, seniority will be the date the lowest required rank was obtained. 


f Where score and seniority are tied, the random number provided by the Department will be applied as a tie breaker. 
g. If no members apply for a specialized position vacancy or no members score high enough to qualify during the selection process, the Troop Commander/Bureau Director may appoint a member to fill the vacancy. No selection process is necessary in this situation, although a written test should be administered to ensure the selected member is qualified. In cases of Corporal or Sergeant vacancies, the position may be filled through the promotion process with the concurrence ofthe Commissioner. 
Section 7. Required Time Limits 
a. 
Unless otherwise specified in the posting, all specialized positions will carry a minimum time limit ofthree years which members are required to serve in the specialty. 

b. 
Exceptions to mandatory minimum time limits for specialties are promotion, retirement or removal from the position. 

c. 
An incumbent may request removal by submitting an SP 3-201 to a Troop Commander/Bureau Director which thoroughly outlines the reason for requesting removal from the position. The final decision to grant or deny removal rests with the Troop Commander/Bureau Director. The incumbent thus removed is ineligible to apply for another specialized position for the duration of the mandatory time limit remaining since appointed or one year from the date of removal from the position, whichever is less. 


Section 8. Selection Process 
a. A selection panel for all Bureau issued Circulars shall consist ofa commissioned officer and a non-commissioned officer, from the Bureau, selected by the Bureau Director. The final member of the panel shall be selected by the PST A President. Ifthe posting is for a Trooper only, this selection shall be a Trooper from the Bureau. If the posting is for a Corporal or Sergeant, this selection shall be a member from the Bureau of equal rank to the highest rank in the posting. NOTE: If a Sergeant is not available to serve on panel for a Sergeant vacancy, a Corporal that is not in the direct chain ofcommand may be selected. Ifthis selection is not made within 14 calendar days of receiving the request, the Bureau Director shall make the appointment. In the event a selection cannot be made within the Bureau, the PSTA President 
45 
shall seek the concurrence of the Bureau Director to select a member from outside the Bureau. 
b. A selection panel for all Troop issued Circulars shall consist of a commissioned officer and a non-commissioned officer, from the Troop, selected by the Troop Commander. The final member of the panel shall be selected by the local Board of Directors member, or his/her designee. Ifthe posting is for a Trooper only, this selection shall be a Trooper from the Troop. If the posting is for a Corporal or Sergeant, this selection shall be a member from the Troop of equal rank to the highest rank in the posting. NOTE: Ifa Sergeant is not available to serve on panel for a Sergeant vacancy, a Corporal that is not in the direct chain of command may be selected. Ifthis selection is not made within 14 calendar days ofreceiving the request, the Troop Commander shall make the appointment. In the event a selection cannot be made within the Troop, the local Board ofDirectors member shall seek the concurrence ofthe Troop Commander to select a member from outside the Troop. 
c. The selection process shall consist ofthe following: 
1. 
A written test consisting of relevant subject matter to the specialty. A maximum of 10 points applied. A member must receive at least seven points to receive further consideration in the selection process. 

2. 
Interview process. A maximum of 10 points applied to entire process. Questions used during the interview process shall be scored individually by the panel members, and the average of those scores is to be used to determine the total number points applied for the interview process. 

3. 
Assessment oftraining and experience. A maximum of 10 points applied. 

4. 
Evaluation ofperformance. A maximum of 10 points applied. 

The evaluation shall be by at least two immediate supervisors who has supervised the member for at least 90 days. Whenever possible, the supervisor responsible for issuing an Employee Performance Review (EPR) should be one of the supervisors. The use of the form located in Appendix H shall be used for scoring purposes. The specific dimensions to be evaluated can be revised on this form based upon the specific requirements of the position being filled. 

5. 
When appropriate, a demonstration of ability relative to the position. A maximum of 10 points applied. 


46 
6. 
In cases where the "demonstration of ability" factor is used, the applicant must achieve a minimum overall score of 35 points to be considered eligible for selection. In all other cases, a minimum overall score of 28 points must be achieved by the applicant for him/her to be considered eligible for selection. 

7. 
The Department may deviate from Section 8 with the agreement of the PSTA. 


Section 9. Posting and Selection for Training 
a. Training which is not offered on a rotational basis or training which is offered to a limited number ofmembers in a specialty or unit shall be electronically posted at all affected work locations for a period of at least 15 calendar days prior to selection of a member to attend. A member who has been notified that a preference transfer has been approved is not eligible to be selected for specialized training at the Troop he/she is departing. Such members are eligible to apply for specialized training opportunities at the new Troop if the effective date of the transfer falls within the posting period. Selection of commissioned officers to attend training is at the discretion ofthe Commissioner. 
When the Troop Commander/Bureau Director has not received sufficient notification ofan available training opportunity to meet the 15 day posting requirement, the time period may be waived upon mutual agreement with the PST A. 
b. Selection of a member shall be by seniority providing the senior member has not 
(1) 
received the same or equivalent training previously, or (2) has not attended special training within the past 180 calendar days, or (3) received a suspension within one year of the selection. Seniority shall be time in the specialty or unit in the Troop/Bureau. [fseniority is tied, the tie breakers shall be time in rank. [fa tie still exists, the member who was sworn in earliest as a Trooper will be considered the most senior. The random number provided by the Department will be applied as the final tie breaker, ifnecessary. 

c. 
[fa member grieves and is awarded the training, the member shall attend the next available training that is equivalent or similar to the training grieved. 


Section l 0. Grievances 
a. 
Grievances relating to the interpretation, application and implementation of this Article shall be filed at the first step ofthe Article 28 grievance procedure. 

b. 
Grievances which are pending and ready for a hearing shall be scheduled independent of other scheduled grievances on a monthly basis for the purpose of adjusting grievances under this section. 


c. The decision ofthe arbitrator shall be final and binding on both parties. 
Section 11. It is understood that the provisions of this Article are not applicable to Commissioned Officers. 
Section 12. Members assigned to Specialized Positions shall be subject to a probationary period of 12 months upon assignment to a specialized position. If a member is removed within that time, such removal is not subject to grievance arbitration. 
ARTICLE 38 TRANSFERS 
Section I. If a member is transferred not at his/her request, on a temporary transfer (less than six months) and he/she is not provided transportation, he/she shall receive a travel allowance equal to the IRS rate applicable in Pennsylvania for all miles in excess of50 miles ( driven miles) per day from his/her place ofresidence to his/her station and return. 
Section 2. If a permanent involuntary transfer results in a subsequent involuntary transfer (the permanent transfer lasting for less than six months) the above allowance shall be applicable retroactively to the member. 
Section 3. a. Except as provided in b. below, when an involuntary intratroop transfer must be made, the member to be transferred must be the member who has the least seniority in his/her rank in that station (provided he/she has not been moved involuntarily in the previous six months) except in cases of promotion, in conjunction with the imposition of discipline or where there is a need for special skills or specialty. 
When the least senior member is transferred under this Section, the Department shall not be required to consider the seniority ofany member concurrently or subsequently transferred into that station. 
b. Irrespective of seniority, the Department, on a temporary basis, can involuntarily transfer a member intratroop when the member is the subject ofan EEO, administrative or criminal investigation which brings the member into actual conflict with other personnel at the work location to the extent that it would interfere with the function of the work location. For the duration ofsuch involuntary transfer, should the distance between the member's place ofresidence and his/her station be greater than 25 miles, the member shall be provided with transportation or a travel allowance equal to the IRS rate applicable in Pennsylvania for all miles in excess of25 miles each way. 
ARTICLE 39 BADGE, RETIREMENT lD, HONORABLE DlSCHARGE UPON RETIREMENT 
Section I. All members with at least 15 years of Pennsylvania State Police service, including intervening Military service, shall be awarded an Honorable Discharge and their badge and retirement ID except upon a showing ofjust cause. 
Section 2. The Commonwealth shall provide each member who retires due to a service­connected disability and who has been honorably discharged with his/her badge and retirement ID at no cost to the member. 
Section 3. On a prospective basis, and not affecting any litigation which is in progress or which has been completed, the Honorable Discharge provisions of this Agreement shall not be applicable to separations occurring prior to December 24, 2008. Members who retire must be notified in writing within thirty (30) days of the first calendar month following retirement of the granting or denial of Honorable Discharge. 
ARTICLE40 CAR UTlLIZATION STUDY 
The seven-member committee which was appointed by the Pennsylvania State Troopers Association to meet periodically with the State Police Administration to discuss the feasibility of developing a program to permit State Police officers to use State Police vehicles during off-duty hours shall continue during the term ofthis Agreement. 
ARTlCLE41 HEALTH CARE COST CONTAINMENT COMMITTEE 
The joint committee which has been established for the purpose ofinvestigating health care cost containment issues shall continue during the term ofthis Agreement. The committee shall be subject to the following provisions: 
I. The committee shall be comprised of not less than two nor more than four representatives each from the Commonwealth and from the PST A. 
2. The PSTA representatives shall be granted time off with pay (unless a present or threatened emergency requires their services) as is reasonably necessary to complete the foregoing (including travel time). 
ARTICLE42 SPECIAL COMMITTEE -PROMOTION SYSTEM 
The committee comprised of five persons to be selected by the PSTA and five persons to be selected by the Commissioner shall meet and discuss on all issues related to the current promotion system. The committee shall make written recommendations to the Commissioner. 
ARTICLE43 SIDE LETTERS 
The five letters dated November 15, 1979 signed by Gary M. Liglttman, Esquire for the PSTA and Brian T. Baxter, Deputy Secretary for Employee Relations for the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania on the following subjects are hereby incorporated by reference: Pennsylvania State Police Disability Benefit, Pennsylvania State Police Health and Welfare Fund, Continuation of Benefits under the "Heart and Lung11 Act, and Non-Service Connected Survivor Benefit (2 letters). The provisions of these letters shall be applicable except as modified by mutual agreement between the parties. 
The provisions of this Article and the side letters referred to herein shall continue in full force and effect for the tenn of this Agreement, any dates in those letters to the contrary notwithstanding. 
ARTICLE44 PHYSICAL FITNESS COMMITTEE 
Section 1. A Committee shall be established to develop a mutually acceptable program of physical fitness for the members ofthe bargaining unit. 
Section 2. The Committee shall be comprised of not less than two nor more than four representatives each from the Commonwealth and the Pennsylvania State Troopers Association. 
Section 3. The PSTA representatives shall be granted time off with pay (unless a present or threatened emergency requires their services) as is reasonably necessary to complete the foregoing (including travel time). 
Section 4. The PSTA members of the Committee shall be provided with access to all information and documents used or considered by the Commonwealth in evaluating the potential physical fitness program and that is reasonably necessary to assist them in the performance oftheir duties. 
Section 5. If after a good faith effort the Committee is unable to reach agreement upon the terms of the physical fitness program, the Commonwealth shall be pennitted to formulate and present the PST A a complete physical fitness program that it intends to implement within the bargaining unit. Ifthe PST A believes that such program is, in whole or in part, unreasonable, it shall so advise the Commonwealth within 10 business days of its receipt and shall include within such notice the reason or reasons for objection. Ifthe Commonwealth so chooses, it may then seek arbitration ofthe dispute as provided in Article 28. 
Section 6. ln the event that the Commonwealth should seek arbitration of the dispute described in Section 5, the following rules shall apply: 
a. 
Unless extended in writing, the hearing shall be held within 45 calendar days from the selection ofthe arbitrator, 

b. 
Ifeither party desires to file briefs at the close of the hearing, they shall be filed in one calendar week; 

c. 
The arbitrator's final and binding decision shall be rendered in 30 days from receipt of the briefs; 

d. 
The arbitrator shall not substitute his/her judgment for the reasonable judgment of the Commonwealth in the development ofthe physical fitness program. 


Section 7. The Commonwealth shall not implement, in whole or in part, a physical fitness program unless and until that program is approved by the arbitrator under the procedures as described in Section 6. 
Section 8. Any member injured as a result of fitness testing shall be deemed to have been injured in the perfonnance of his or her duties and shall be eligible to receive benefits either through the Heart & Lung Act and/or workers' compensation. 
ARTICLE45 FAMILY CARE LEA VE 
Section l. After completing one year of service, members shall be granted, upon written request, up to 12 weeks ofleave without pay in a calendar year for the purpose ofattending to the medical needs of a spouse, parent, child under age 18 or 18 years or older and incapable of self­care because of mental or physical disability, or other person qualifying as a dependent under IRS eligibility criteria. 
Leave for this purpose may be taken one day at a time if necessary. Leave shall be approved for less than one day at a time when medically necessary due to a serious health condition as defined in the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993. 
Documentation ofthe need for Family Care Leave shall be required. 
Section 2. State-paid coverage for medical benefits, supplemental health benefits, and Group Life lnsurance as provided in Articles 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23 and 24 will continue for the period of time the member is on family care leave under Section 1 ofthis Article. 
Section 3. The 12 week entitlement under Section I above may not be extended. 
Section 4. Members will not be required to use accumulated annual and/or personal leave prior to taking family care leave without pay. 
Section 5. For the purpose ofthis Article, the calendar year shall be defined as beginning with the member's first full pay period commencing on or after January 1 and continuing through the end ofthe member's pay period that includes December 31. 
ARTICLE46 LIMITED DUTY 
Section I. Work-Related Limited Duty 
All side letters regarding work-related limited duty dated prior to May I, 2013 are modified as follows: 
a. 
Members currently or in the future who are on work-related limited duty shall be limited to the lesser of: ( 1) the length ofthe illness/injury requiring limited duty or (2) completion oftwenty-five (25) years ofcreditable service. 

b. 
Where the member completes his/her twenty-fifth (25th) year of creditable service while on limited duty, the member shall be separated from employment. 

c. 
A member who is placed on limited duty after twenty-five (25) years ofcreditable service, shall be removed from limited duty after the earlier of: ( 1) the length of the illness/injury requiring limited duty or (2) one ( 1) year after which he/she shall be separated from employment. 


Section 2. Non-Work-Related Disabilities 
Members placed into a permanent limited duty status shall not be guaranteed entitlement of continuing limited duty beyond the date that they reach twenty-five (25) years of creditable service. 
ARTICLE47 EMPLOYEE AUTHORIZED PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS 
Section 1. The Employer agrees to deduct from the paycheck of members covered by this Agreement voluntary contributions to the Pennsylvania State Troopers Association's Political Action Committee. The Employer shall make such deductions only in accordance with the written authorization of respective members which shall specify the amount, frequency and duration ofthe deductions. 
Section 2. The Employer shall transmit the monies deducted in accordance with this Article to the Pennsylvania State Troopers Association's Political Action Committee in accordance with the procedures agreed to by the Employer and the Pennsylvania State Troopers Association. 
Section 3. The Commonwealth shall provide one payroll slot to the PSTA to be used for a voluntary deduction for the Troopers Helping Troopers Foundation. The voluntary deduction shall be made only in accordance with the written authorization of respective members which shall specify the amount, frequency and duration of the deduction, as well as the member's name, employee number, and work location. The Commonwealth's only obligation under this Section will be to deduct the authorized amount from the regular bi-weekly salary and wages of the members who have requested the deduction through written authorization and to electronically transmit the aggregate amount, together with an itemized statement to PSTA's designated account recipient for the Troopers Helping Troopers Foundation by the last day of the succeeding month after such deductions are made. The Commonwealth shall not be required to provide additional reports or other information either to the PSTA or the Troopers Helping Troopers Foundation. The provisions ofSection 5 ofthis Article shall apply to this payroll slot. 
Section 4. The Pennsylvania State Troopers Association shall reimburse the Employer for the Employer's actual cost for the expenses incurred in administering this Article. 
Section 5. The Pennsylvania State Troopers Association shall indemnify and hold the Commonwealth harmless against any and all claims, suits, orders, or judgments brought or issued against the Employer as a result of the action taken or not taken by the Employer under the provisions ofthis Article. 
ARTICLE48 LEAVE DONATION PROGRAM 
Section 1. The Commonwealth will implement and administer a Leave Donation Program. Members may donate annual and personal leave to a designated member in the member's bargaining unit who has used all accrued and anticipated paid leave for the current leave calendar year. The leave is to be used for the recipient's own catastrophic or severe injury or illness or for the catastrophic or severe injury or illness of a family member. The leave also may be used as bereavement leave if the member's family member dies and the member has no accrued or anticipated sick leave available, subject to the limitations in Article 14, Section 3. 
Section 2.  Recipients  
a.  Recipients must be members in the bargaining unit.  
b.  Family member is defined as a husband, wife, child, step-child, foster-child or  

parent ofthe member or any other person qualifying as a dependent under IRS eligibility criteria. 
c. 
A catastrophic or severe illness or injury that poses a direct threat to life or to the vital function of major bodily systems or organs, and would cause the member to take leave without pay or terminate employment, must be documented on a Family and Medical Leave Act Serious Health Condition Certification form. Donated leave may not be used for work-related injuries or illnesses, minor illnesses, injuries, or impairments, sporadic, short-term recurrences of chronic, non-life threatening conditions, short-term absences due to contagious diseases, or short-term recurring medical or therapeutic treatments, except for conditions such as those listed above. 

d. 
The absence due to the catastrophic or severe illness or injury of the member or a family member must be for more than 20 workdays in the current leave calendar year. The 20­workday absence may be accumulated on an intermittent basis if properly documented as related to the same catastrophic or severe illness or injury. Annual, personal, sick (for member's own serious health condition), sick family (for the serious health condition of a family member), holiday, compensatory, or unpaid leave may be used during the accumulation period. A separate accumulation period must be met for each catastrophic or severe illness or injury and for each leave calendar year in which donated leave is used. Donated leave may not be applied to the required 20-workday accumulation period. 


e. All accrued leave must be used as follows before any donation may be received: 
(1) For a member's own catastrophic or severe injury or illness, all accrued annual, sick, personal, holiday, and compensatory leave and all anticipated annual and sick leave for the current leave calendar year must be used. 
S4 
(2) For the catastrophic or severe injury or illness of a family member, all accrued annual, personal, holiday, and compensatory leave and all anticipated annual leave for the current leave calendar year must be used. All five days of sick family leave and any additional sick family leave for which the member is eligible must be used. 
f. 
Up to 12 weeks of donated leave per leave calendar year may be received for all conditions ofthe member and family members cumulatively, but donations may not be received in more than two consecutive leave calendar years. Donated leave is added to the recipient's sick leave balance on a biweekly basis. Recipients do not repay the donor for donated leave. Leave usage is monitored closely to ensure that donated leave is used only for absences related to the catastrophic or severe illness or injury. Upon exhaustion ofthe 12 week donated leave cap, a member may request an additional donation of up to thirty (30) days which shall be allowed at the discretion ofthe Commissioner and shall not be unreasonably denied. Members shall not be required to exhaust personal days before being eligible to access the Leave Donation Program. 

g. 
The recipient's entitlement to leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act will be reduced by donated leave that is used. Entitlements to sick leave without pay (for a member's own illness) or family care leave without pay (for a family member's illness) will also be reduced. 

h. 
Donated leave may be used on an intermittent basis. However, each absence may be required to be medically documented as due to the same catastrophic or severe illness or injury. 

i. 
A member is not eligible to receive donations of leave if, during the previous six months, the member has been placed on a written leave restriction, or has received a written reprimand or suspension related to attendance. 

j. 
Donated leave that remains unused once the member is released by the physician for full-time work, when the family member's condition no longer requires the member's absence, or at the end ofthe leave calendar year, must be returned to the donors in inverse order of donation. However, if at the end of the year, the absence is expected to continue beyond the greater of 20 workdays or the amount of annual and sick leave that could be earned and used in the following leave calendar year, donated leave may be carried into the next year. 


Section 3. Donors 
a. 
A donor may voluntarily donate annual and personal leave to a member within the donor's bargaining unit who meets the requirements ofthe Leave Donation Program. Donations may be made to multiple members, as long as the minimum donation is made to each member. 

b. 
Donations must be made in increments of one day (8.0 hours), but not more than five days can be donated to any one member in the same leave calendar year. The donor's annual leave balance after donation cannot be less than the equivalent offive workdays of leave 


55 
(40.0 
hours). Anticipated personal leave may not be donated. 

c. 
The donation is effected by the completion and submission of a Request to Donate Leave to the Bureau of Human Resources. Leave is deducted from the donor's annual and/or personal leave balance at the time of donation and transferred to the recipient in order by the date and time the Request to Donate Leave form is received. 

d. 
Unused donations are returned to the donor if: the recipient or family member recovers, dies, or separates before the donor's leave is used; or if the recipient does not use the leave by the end of the leave calendar year, and is expected to either return to work within 20 workdays or to have sufficient anticipated leave available in the new year to cover the absence. In accordance with Section l above, a member whose family member dies and who does not have accrued or anticipated sick leave available, may use donated leave as bereavement leave, subject to the limitations in Article 14, Section 3. 


Section 4. The provisions of this Article are not grievable under Article 28 of this Agreement. 
ARTICLE49 CIVILIANIZA TION 
Section l. Effective December 24, 2008 or at such appropriate time as determined by the Employer, the Employer shall have the right to convert from enlisted to civilian the positions listed in Section 2 and the functions listed in Section 3. 
Section 2. Positions to be civilianized are: 
PCO Supervisors working in CDCs Grants Acquisition and Administration Section Trooper Grants Acquisition and Administration Section Supervisor Webmaster Management Information Unit and UCR Section Supervisor Troop Communications Supervisor Procurement and Supply Officer 
The civilianization of these positions shall be done by attrition such that current enlisted members holding these positions shall be replaced by civilians only when the enlisted member leaves the position voluntarily or involuntarily. 
56 
Section 3. In addition to the positions listed in Section 2, the Employer shall have the right to civilianize the following functions by hiring formerly enlisted annuitants to perform such functions under such tenns and conditions deemed appropriate by the Employer: 
a.  Non-Criminal Aspects of Background Investigations. Annuitants shall be permitted to perform all non-criminal aspects of background investigations (e.g., contacting references, family members, community members, acquaintances; credit checks; and/or conducting employment history verifications checks; etc.). Criminal aspects of background investigations, such as contacting other law enforcement agencies and performing criminal history checks, shall continue to be performed by enlisted personnel.  
b.  Non-Criminal Physical Fingerprinting. Annuitants shall be pennitted to perform the physical fingerprinting for all purposes, with the exception ofcriminal suspects under arrest, who shall continue to be fingerprinted by enlisted personnel.  
Section 4.  To address future needs or issues regarding civilianization of current positions  

within the bargaining unit, or functions performed by the bargaining unit, the Employer shall notify the PST A in writing of specific positions and/or functions that it deems appropriate or desirable for civilianization. If agreement is not reached within 90 days, the Interest Arbitration Panel shall hear and resolve the matter. The Employer shall have the option ofwithdrawing its civilianization request after the Panel has rendered its decision. 
ARTICLE 50 TOBACCO USE 
Notwithstanding any existing regulation of tobacco use, members are prohibited from using any form of tobacco, including smokeless tobacco, inside any Commonwealth owned vehicle. 
ARTICLE 51 HEALTH CARE SHOP AROUND 
The Commonwealth shall have the right to competitively bid out and award any and all contracts of health care programs for active members and those who retire under this Agreement, provided that the resulting programs shall be substantially similar in benefits and cost to the active bargaining unit members and those who retire under this Agreement when compared to those programs in place as amended herein and giving due consideration to the circumstances at the time. Prior to implementation, any changes must be agreed to by the parties or ordered by the Interest Arbitration Panel, which shall upon request of either party conduct a hearing and issue a ruling within 45 days of notification by the Employer to the PST A of any proposed change under this provision. The PSTA shall have 15 days from notification to review the request and the Panel shall have 30 days to conduct a hearing and issue a ruling within the aforementioned 45 day time frame. 
ARTICLE 52 TERM OF AGREEMENT 
This Agreement shall be effective as ofJuly 1, 2012. The term of the collective bargaining agreement shall be for five years commencing on July l, 2012 and terminating on June 30, 2017. All terms set forth above shall be effective July 1, 2012, unless otherwise indicated. 
Appendix A 
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2012 PAYSCALE T\'PE SP 
SP01  SP01  SP01  SP01  SP01  SP01  SP02  SP04  SP08  SP08  SP09  
LONGEVITY RANGE  TROOPER STEP s  TROOPER STEP A  TROOPER STEP 8  TROOPER STEP C  TROOPER STEP 0  TROOPER STEP E·  CPRL STEP E  SRGNT STEP E  LIEUT STEP E  CPT STEP E  MAJOR STEP E  YEARS OF SVC  
A  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  28.18 2,254.40 58,795  29.n 2,381.80 62,112  31.40 2,512.00 65,513  32.29 2,583.20 87,370  33.21 2,856.80 69,289  34.14 2,731.20 71,230  36.87 2,949.80 78,928  40.00 3,200.00 83,458  43.60 3,488.00 90,967  47.52 3,801.80 99,148  52.03 4,182.40 108,555  YEARS 1 lliROUGH 5  
B  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  35.20 2,818.00 73,441  36.19 2,895.20 75,507  39.08 3,128.40 81,537  42.40 3,3112.00 88,463  48.22 3,697.80 96,433  50.37 4,029.60 105,092  55.15 4,412.00 115,065  START OF 6th YEAR  
C  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  36.53 2,922.40 78,216  39.45 3,156.00 82,308  42.80 3,424.00 89.298  <18.65 3,732.00 97,331  50,85 .C,068.00 108,093  55.67 4,453.60 116,150  START OF 7th YEAR  
0  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  36.87 2,949.80 76,926  39,82 3,185.80 83,080  43.20 3,458.00 90,132  47.09 3,787.20 98,249  51.32 4,105.60 107,074  56.19 4,495.20 117,235  START OFBlll YEAR  
E  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  37.21 2,978.80 n,1135  40.19 3.215.20 83,852  43.80 3,468.00 90,987  47.52 3,801.80 99,148  51.80 4,144.00 108,078  58.71 4,536.80 118,320  START OF 9th YEAR  
F  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  37.55 3,004.00 78,344  40.58 3,244.80 84,624  44.00 3,520.00 91,802  47.96 3,836.80 100,064  52.27 4,181.80 109,058  57.23 4,578.40 119,405  START OF10111 YEAR  
G  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  37.90 3,032.00 711,075  40.93 3,274.40 85,396  44.40 3,552.00 92,636  48.40 3,872.00 100,982  52.75 4,220.00 110,058  57.75 4,620.00 120,490  START OF11111 YEAR  
H  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  38.24 3,059.20 79,784  41.29 3,303.20 86,147  44.80 3,564.00 93,471  48,83 3,906.40 101,879  53.22 4,257.80 111,038  58.27 4,681.80 121,575  START OF 12th YEAR  
HOURLY  • Ralas Imm Longevity Range I and  39.35  41.88  45.20  49.27  53,70  58.711  START  
BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  above relleCl Trooper 1s1Class pay differential.  3,148.00 82,100  3,332.80 86,919  3,816.00 94,305  3,941.60 102,797  4,2116.00 112,040  4,703.20 122,859  OF 13th YEAR  
J  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  39.69 3,175.20 82,809  42.03 3,362.40 87,891  45.80 3,648.00 95,140  49.70 3,976.00 103,694  54.17 4,333.60 113,020  59.31 4,744.80 123,744  START OF 14th YEAR  
K  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL*  40.04 3,203.20 83,539  42.40 3,392.00 8B,483  48.00 3,6BO.OO 95,974  50.14 4,011.20 104,612  54,65 4,372.00 114,022  59.83 4,786.40 124,829  START OF15111 YEAR  
L  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  40.39 3,231.20 84.270  42.n 3,421.60 89.235  48.40 3,712.00 98,809  50.5a 4,046.40 105,530  55.12 4,409.60 115,002  60,35 4,828.00 125,914  START OF 16th YEAR  
M  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  40.74 3,259.20 85,000  43.14 3,451.20 90,007  46,80 3,744.00 97,644  51.01 4,080.60 108,427  55.60 4,448.00 116,004  80,68 4,870.40 127,020  START OF 17th YEAR  

Page 1 012 AppendbtA 
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE EFFECTIVE JULY 1,2012 PAY SCALE TYPE SP 
LONGEVITY RANGE  SP01 moOPER STEP s  SPOI TROOPER STEP A  SP01 TROOPER STEP B  SP01 TROOPER STEP C  SP01 TROOPER STEP D  SP01 TROOPER SlEP E•  SP02 CPRL STEP E  SP04 SRGNT STEP E  SPOO LIEUT STEP E  SP08 CPT STEP E  SP09 MAJOR STEP E  YEARS OF SVC  
N  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  41.09 3.287.20 115,730  43.51 3,480.80 90,779  47.20 3,776.00 98,478  51.45 4,116.00 107,345  56.07 4,485.80 116,984  81.40 4,912.00 128,105  START OF 18th YEAR  
0  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  41.44 3,315.20 86,480  43.88 3,510,40 91,551  47.60 3,808.00 99,313  51.88 4,150.4D 108.242  56.55 4,524.00 117,986  81.92 4,953.60 129,190  START OF191h YEAR  
p  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  41,76 3,342.40 87,170  44.24 3,539.20 92.302  48.00 3,840.00 100,147  52.32 4,185.60 109,160  57,02 4,581.80 118,987  82.44 4,995.20 130,275  START OF 20th YEAR  
Q  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  42.13 3,370.4D 87,900  44.61 3,566.8D 93.074  48.40 3,872.00 100,982  52.76 4,22D.80 110,078  57,50 4,800.00 119,986  62.96 5,036.80 131,360  START OF 21st YEAR  
R  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  42.48 3,398,40 88,630  44.98 3,598.40 93,846  48.80 3,904.00 101,818  53,19 4,255.20 110,978  57.97 4,637.60 120,949  63.48 5,078.40 132,445  START OF 22nd YEAR  
s  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  42.83 3,426.40 89,361  45,35 3,628.00 94,618  49.2D 3,938.00 102,651  53.63 4,290.40 111,894  58.45 4,676.00 121,950  64.00 5,120.00 133,530  START OF 23rd YEAR  
T  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  43,18 3,454.4D 90,091  45.72 3,657.80 95,390  49.80 3,988.00 103,4115  54.00 4,324.80 112,791  58.92 4,713.60 122,931  84.52 5,181.60 134,615  START OF 24th YEAR  
u  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  43.53 3,482.40 90,821  46.09 3,687.20 98,182  50.00 4,000.00 104,320  54.SO 4,360.00 113,709  59.40 4,752.00 123,932  65.04 5.203.20 135,699  START OF 25th YEAR  
V  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  43.87 3,509.80 91,530  48.48 3,716,80 98.934  50.40 4,032.00 105,155  54.94 4.395.20 114,827  59.88 4,790.40 124,934  85.56 5,244.80 136,784  START OF 26th YEAR  
w  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  44.22 3,537.60 92,281  48.82 3,745.80 97,885  50.80 4,084.00 105,989  55.37 4,429.60 115,524  60.35 4,828.00 125,914  66.08 5,288.40 137,869  START OF 27th YEAR  
HOURLY X BIWEEKLY ANNUAL• • Annual rates Isled on lhls schedule8111 appn1xlmale.  44.57 3,565.80 92,991  47.19 3,775.20 98,457  51.20 4,096.00 106,824  55.81 4,484.80 116,442  60,83 4,866.40 126.916  66.80 5,328.00 138,954  START OF2111h YEAR  

Page2ol2 
Appendix B (Table 1) 
COMMONWEAllli OF PENNSYLVANIA STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2013 PAY SCALE TYPE SP Members hlrad prior to 71112013  
LONGEVITY RANGE  SPD1 TROOPER STEP s  SP01 TROOPER STEP A  SPD1 TROOPER STEP B  SP01 TROOPER STEP C  SPD1 TROOPER STEP D  SPOt TROOPER STEP E·  SP02 CPRL STEP E  SP04 SRGNT STEP E  SP06 LIEUT STEP E  SP08 CPT STEP E  SP09 M.A.JOR STEP E  YEARS OF SVC  
A  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  28.74 2,299.20 59,983  30.37 2,429.60 83,384  32,03 2,582.40 66,827  32.94 2,835.20 88,728  33.87 2,709.80 70,888  34.82 2,785.80 72,848  37.81 3,008.80 78,470  40.81 3,284.80 85,148  44.48 3,558.40 92,803  48.48 3,878.40 101,149  53.09 4,247.20 110,787  YEARS! THROUGH 5  
B  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  35.90 2,872.00 74,902  38.91 2,952.80 77,009  39.87 3,189.80 83,185  43.28 3,460.80 90,258  47.15 3,772.00 98,374  51.39 4,111.20 107,220  58.28 4,502.40 117,423  START OF 6th YEAR  
C  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  37.28 2,980.80 77,739  40.24 3,219.20 83,957  43.67 3,493.60 91,113  47.59 3,807.20 99,292  51.87 4,149.80 108,222  58.81 4,544.80 118,528  START OF7lh YEAR  
D  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  37.61 3,008.80 78,470  40.62 3,249.6D 84,750  44.07 3,525.60 91,948  48.04 3,843.20 100,231  52.38 4,188.80 109,244  57.34 4,587.20 119,634  START OF81h YEAR  
E  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  37.95 3,038.00 79,179  40.99 3,279.20 85,522  44.48 3,558.40 92,803  48.48 3,878.40 101,149  52.84 4,227.20 110.245  57.87 4,829.80 120,740  START OF 9th YEAR  
~·  F  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  38.30 3,064.00 79,909  41.37 3,309.80 86,314  44.89 3,591.20 93,858  48.93 3,914.40 102,088  53.33 4,266.40 111,268  58.40 4,872.00 121,848  START OF101h YEAR  
G  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  33.85 3,092.00 80,639  41.75 3,340.00 87,107  45.30 3,624.00 94,514  49.37 3,949.80 103,006  53.81 4,304.80 112,289  58.93 4,714.40 122,952  START OF 11th YEAR  
H  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  39.00 3,120.00 81,370  42.12 3,369.80 87,879  45.71 3,858.BD 95,369  49.82 3,985.80 103,944  54.30 4,344.00 113.292  59.48 4,758.80 124,057  START OF 12th YEAR  
HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  • Ra1es fTom Longelrily Range I and above n,ftec:t Trooper 1st Class paydiffen,ntial.  40.14 3,211.20 83,748  42.50 3,400.00 88,672  46.12 3,689.60 96,225  50.26 4,020.80 104,862  54.78 4,382.40 114,293  59.99 4,799.20 125,163  START OF 13th YEAR  
J  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  40.49 3,239.20 84,478  42.88 3,430.40 69,465  46.52 3,721.80 97,059  50.71 4,058.80 105,601  55.27 4,421.60 115,315  80.52 4,841.60 126,269  START OF 14th YEAR  
K  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL'  40.85 3,288.00 85.229  43.25 3,480.00 90.237  46.93 3,754.40 97,815  51.15 4,092.00 106,718  55.75 4,480.00 118,317  61.05 4,11114.00 127,375  START OF15th YEAR  
L  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  41.20 3,296.00 85,960  43.63 3,490.40 91,030  47.34 3,787.20 93,770  51.BD 4,128.00 107,858  56.24 4,499.20 117,339  61.58 4,926.40 128,481  START OF 16th YEAR  
M  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  41.58 3,324.80 88.711  44.00 3,520.00 91,802  47.75 3,820.00 99,828  52.04 4,183.20 108,576  56.72 4,537.80 118,341  82.12 4,969.80 129,607  START OF 171h YEAR  

Page 1012 
Appendix B {Table 1) 
COMMONWEALTHOF PENNSYLVANIA  
STATE POLICE PAYSCHEDULE  
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2013  
PAY SCALE l'l'PE SP  
Members llired priorlo 71112013  
SP01  SP01  SP01  SP01  SP01  SPOI  SPD2  SPCM  SP06  SP08  SP09  
TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  CPRL  SRGNT  LIEUT  CPT  MAJOR  YEARS  
LONGEVITY  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  OF  
RANGE  s  A  B  C  0  E"  E  E  E  E  E  SVC  
N  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  41.91 3,352.80 87,441  44.38 3,550.40 92,594  48.16 3,852.80 100,481  52.49 4,199.20 109,515  57.21 4,578.80 119,363  62.65 5,012.00 130,713  START OF 18111 YEAR  
HOURLY  42.27  44.76  48.58  52.93  57.69  63.18  START  
0  BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  3,381.60 88,192  3,580.80 93,387  3,864.80 101,316  4,234.40 110,433  4,615.20 120,364  5,054.40 131,819  OF 19111 YEAR  
p  HOURLY BIWEEKLY  42.62 3,409.60  45.13 3,810.40  48.97 3,917.60  53.38 4,270.40  58.18 4,654.40  63.71 5,098.80  START OF20111  
ANNUAL"  88,922  94,159  102,171  111,372  121,387  132,925  YEAR  
Q  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  42.98 3,438.40 89,673  45.51 3,640.80 94,952  49.38 3,950.40 103,0211  5:uz 4,305.60 112,290  58.66 4,692.80 122,Jaa  64.24 5,139.20 134,030  START OF 21st YEAR  
R  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  43.33 3,486.40 90,404  45.88 3,670.40 95,724  49.79 3,983.20 103,882  54.27 4,341.60 113,229  59.15 4,732.00 123,411  114.77 5,181.60 135,138  START OF 22nd YEAR  
HOURLY  • Rales llom Longevity Range S and  44.11  46.26  50.20  54.71  59.63  65.30  START  
s  BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  above rellecl MasterTrvoper pay differenllal  3,528.80 92,031  3,700.80 98,517  4,018.00 104,737  4,378.80 114,147  4,770.40 124,412  5,224.00 138,242  OF 23rd YEAR  
T  HOURLY BIWEEKLY  44.47 3,557.80  48.64 3,731.20  50,60 4,048.00  55.18 4.412.80  80.12 4,809.80  65.83 5,266.40  START OF24111  
ANNUAL"  92,782  97,310  105,572  115,088  125,434  137,348  YEAR  
u  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  44.83 3,588.40 93,533  47.01 3,760.80 98,082  51.01 4,080.80 106,427  55.60 4,448.00 116,004  BO.BO 4,648.00 126,436  66.38 5,308.80 138,454  START OF 25111 YEAR  
V  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  45.18 3,814.40 94,284  47.39 3,791.20 98,874  51.42 4,113.60 107,2113  56.CM 4,483.20 116,922  61.03 4,888.40 127,437  66.89 5,351.20 139,559  START OF 28111 YEAR  
w  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  45.54 3,643.20 95,015  47.76 3,820.80 99,648  51.83 4,148.40 108,138  56.49 4,519.20 117,861  61.57 4,925.60 128,460  117.42 5,393.60 140,6115  START OF 27111 YEAR  
HOURLY X BIWEEKLY ANNUAL• • Annual 111tesIsled on lhls schedule are appn,ximate.  45.90 3,672.00 95,766  48.14 3,851.20 100,439  52.24 4,179.20 103,994  58.93 4,554.40 118,779  82.05 4,964.00 129,481  87.98 5,438.80 141,7112  START OF 28111 YEAR  

Page 2012 Appendix B (Table 2) 
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA  
STATE POLICE PAYSCHEDULE  
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2013  
PAY SCALE TYPE SP  
Members hired on or after 711/2013  
SP01  $POI  SP01  SP01  SP01  SP01  SP02  SP04  SPOIi  SP08  SP09  
TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  CPRL  SRGNT  LIEUT  CPT  MAJOR  YEARS  
LONGEVITY  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  OF  
RANGE  s  A  8  C  D  E"  E  E  E  E  E  SVC  
A  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  26.12 2,069.60 54,497  27.86 2,228.BO 58,127  29.60 2,368.00 61,757  31.:W 2,507.20 65,388  33.08 2,846.40 69,018  :W.82 2,785,BO 72,848  37.61 3,008.80 78,470  40,81 3,284.80 85,146  «.48 3,558.40 92,803  48.48 3,878.40 101,149  53.09 4,2.7.20 110,767  YEARS 1 THROUGH 5  
HOURLY  35.06  38.91  39.87  43.26  47.15  51.39  56.28  START  
B  BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  2,804.80 73,149  2,952.80 77,009  3,189.60 83,185  3,460.80 90,258  3,772.00 98,374  4,111.20 107,220  4,502.40 117,423  OF 6111 YEAR  
HOURLY  37,26  40.24  43.67  47,59  51.87  56,81  START  
C  BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  2,980.BO 77,739  3,219.20 83,957  3,493.60 91,113  3,807.20 99,292  4,149.60 108,222  4,5.4.80 118,528  Of 7111 YEAR  
HOURLY  37,61  40.62  «.07  48.04  52.36  57.:W  START  
D  BIWEEKLY  3,008.BO  3,249.60  3,525.60  3,843.20  4,188.80  4,587.20  OF 8111  
ANNUAL"  78,470  84,750  91,948  100,231  109,2«  119,634  YEAR  
E  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  37.9S 3,038.00 79,179  40.99 3,279.20 8S,522  «.48 3,558.40 92,803  48.48 3,878.40 101,149  52.84 4.227.20 110,245  57.87 4,629.60 120,740  START OF9111 YEAR  
HOURLY  38,30  41.37  «.89  48,93  53.33  56.40  START  
F  BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  3,064.00 79,909  3,309.60 88,314  3,591.20 93,658  3,914.40 102,088  4,266.40 111.268  4,872.00 121,846  OF 10111 YEAR  
G  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  38.65 3,092.00 80,639  41.75 3,:W0.00 87,107  45.30 3,624.00 94,514  49.37 3,9411.60 103,006  53.81 4,304.BO 112.269  58.93 4,714.40 122,952  START OF 11111 YEAR  
H  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  39.00 3,120,00 81,370  42.12 3,389.60 87,879  45.71 3,656.80 95,389  49.82 3,985.60 103,944  54.30 4,344.00 113,292  59.46 4,758.80 124,057  START OF 12111 YEAR  
HOURLY  • Ratesfrom Longe'olit\l Range Iand  40,14  42.50  46.12  50,26  54.78  59.99  START  
BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  above 111llect Trooper 1st Class pay dllerential.  3,211.20 83,748  3,.00.00 88,872  3,689.60 96,225  4,020.80 104,862  4,382.40 114,293  4,799.20 125,163  OF 131h YEAR  
HOURLY  40.49  42.88  46.52  50.71  55.27  60.52  START  
J  BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  3,239.20 64,478  3,430.40 89,465  3,721.60 97,059  4,058.80 105,801  4,421.60 115,315  4,841.60 128,269  OF141h YEAR  
HOURLY  40.85  43.25  48.93  51.15  55.75  81.05  START  
K  BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  3,268.00 85,229  3,460.00 90,237  3,754..0 97.915  .,092.00 108,719  4,.60.00 118,317  .,884,00 127,375  OF15111 YEAR  
HOURLY  41.20  43.63  47.34  51.60  58.24  81.58  START  
L  BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  3,296.00 85,960  3,490..0 91,030  3,787.20 98,770  4,128.00 107,858  4,499.20 117,339  4,928.40 128,481  OF 16111 YEAR  
M  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  41.56 3,324.80 86,711  «.oo 3,520.00 91,802  .7.75 3,820.00 99,826  52.04 4,163.20 108,576  58.72 4,537.60 118,341  62.12 4,989.60 129,607  START OF 17th YEAR  

Page 1 012 
Appendix B (Table 2) 
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE EFFECTIVE JULY 1,2013 PAY SCALE TYPE SP Memben; hired on or an.er 7/1/2013 
SP01 
SPOI SP01 SP01 SPOI SPOI 
SP02 
SP04 
SP06 SP08 
SP09 TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER CPRL 
SRGNT LIEUT 
CPT 
WJOR YEARS 
LONGEVITY STEP STEP STEP STEP STEP STEP STEP STEP STEP STEP STEP OFRANGE s A B C D 
e· 

E E E E E SVC 
HOURLY 
44.38
. 1.91 
48.16 
52.49 
57.21 
62.65 START
N BIWEEKLY 3,352.80 
3,550.40 
3,852.110 
4,199.20 
4,578.80 
5,012.00 OF 18111
ANNUAL• 
87,441 92,594 100,481 
109,515 119,383 130,713 YEAR 
HOURLY 42.27 
44.76 
48.56 
52.93 
57.69 
83.18 START
0 BIWEEKLY 3,381.60 
3,580.80 
3,884.80 
4,234.40 
..615.20 
5,054.40 OF 19th 
ANNUAL• 
88,192 
93,387 101,318 110,433 120,364 131,819 YEAR 
HOURLY 
45.13 
48.97
.2.62 
53.38 
58.18 
63.71 START
p 
BIWEEKLY 3,409.60 
3,810.40 
3,917.60 
4,270.40 
4,854.40 
5,096.80 OF 20111
ANNUAL• 88,922 94,159 102,171 111,372 121,387 132,925 YEAR 
HOURLY 
42.98 
45.51 
49.38 
53,82 
58.68 
64.24 START 
a BIWEEKLY 
3.438.40 
3,840.80 
3,950.40 
4,305.60 
4,692,8D 
5,139.20 OF 21st ANNUAL• 89,673 
94,952 
103,026 
112.290 
122,388 134,030 YEAR 
HOURLY 
43.33 
45.88 
49.79 
59,15
54.27 
64.n START
R BIWEEKLY 3,468.40 
3,670.40 
3,983.20 
4,341.60 
4,732.00 
5,181.60 OF 22ndANNUAL• 
90,404 95,724 
103,882 113.229 
123.411 
135,136 YEAR 
HOURLY • Rates llllm Longevity Range S and 44.11 
46.26 
54,7150.20 
59.83 
65.30 START s BIWEEKLY above 111llectMaster Trooper 3,528.80 
3,700.80 
4,018.00 
4,376.80 
4,no.4o 
5.224.00 OF 23rdANNUAL• pay differential 92,031 
~ 
98,517 104,737 114,147 124,412 138,242 YEAR 
HOURLY 
44.47 
48.84 
50.60 
55.18 
80.12 
65.83 STARTT BIWEEKLY 3,557.80 
3,731.20 
4,048.00 
4,412.60 
4,809.60 
5,266.40 OF 24111ANNUAL• 92,782 97,310 105,572 115,088 125,434 137,348 YEAR 
HOURLY 
44.83 
47.D1 
51.01 
55.80 
60.60 
68.38 START 
u BIWEEKLY 3,588.40 
3,760.80 
4,080.80 
4,448.00 
4,848,00 
5,308.80 OF 25th ANNUAL• 93,533 
98,082 
106,427 116,004 126.436 
138,454 YEAR 
HOURLY 45,18 
47.39 
51.42 
58,04 
61.08 
66.89 START
V BIWEEKLY 3,614.40 
3,791.20 
4,113.60 
4,483.20 
4,886.40 
5,351.20 OF261hANNUAL• 94,284 
98,874 
107,283 116,922 127.437 
139,559 YEAR 
HOURLY 
45.54 
47.76 
51.83 
56.49 
61.57 
87.42 START w BIWEEKLY 3,643.20 
3,820.80 
4,148.40 
4,519.20 
4,925.60 
5,393.60 OF 27111ANNUAL• 95,015 
99,846 
108,138 117,861 128,460 140,685 YEAR 
HOURLY 45,90 
48.14 
52.24 
58,93 
82.05 
67.96 STARTX BIWEEKLY 3,872.00 
3,851.20 
4,178.20 
4,554.40 
4,964.00 
5,438.80 OF 28thANNUAL" 95,788 100,439 108.994 
118,nD 129.461 
141,792 YEAR• Annual rates isled on 1111s schedule are approximate. 
Page2 of 2 
Appendix C (Table 1) 
COMMONWEALTli OFPENNSYLVANIA STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2014 PAY SCALE TWE SP Members hiredpt1or to 711/2013  
LONGEVITY RANGE  SP01 TROOPER STEP s  SPOI TROOPER STEP A  SP01 TROOPER STEP B  SP01 TROOPER STEP C  SP01 TROOPER STEP 0  SP01 TROOPER STEP E·  SP02 CPRL STEP E  SP04 SRGNT STEP E  SP06 LIEUT STEP E  SP08 CPT STEP E  SP09 MAJOR STEP E  YEARS OF SVC  
A  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  29.46 2,358.80 61,-465  31.13 2,490.-40 64,950  32.83 2,626.-40 68,497  33.76 2,700.80 70,437  3-4.72 2,777.80 72,«0  35.69 2,855.20 74,464  38.55 3,084.00 80,431  41,83 3,3-46.40 87,27-4  45.59 3,647.20 95,119  49.69 3,975.20 103,673  54.41 4,352.80 113,521  VEARS 1 THROUGH 5  
B  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  36.80 2,944.00 76,780  37.83 3,026.40 78,929  -40.86 3,268.80 85,250  «.34 3,547.20 92,511  48.33 3,866.40 100,836  52.67 4,213.60 109,891  57.67 4,613,60 120,323  START OF6th YEAR  
C  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL*  38.19 3,055.20 79,680  41.25 3,300.00 86,064  «.76 3,580.80 93,387  48.78 3,902.-40 101,775  53.17 4,253.60 110,93-4  58.22 4,657.60 121,470  START OF71h VEAR  
0  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL*  38.55 3,084.00 80,431  41.83 3,330.40 88,857  45.18 3,614.40 94,264  49.24 3,939.20 102,734  53.67 4,293.60 111,977  58.76 -4,700.80 122,597  START Of8111 YEAR  
E  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  38,90 3,112.00 81,161  42.02 3,361.80 87,671  45.59 3,647.20 95,119  49.69 3,975.20 103,673  54.16 4,332.80 112,999  511.31 4,744.80 123,744  START OF91h YEAR  
8:  F  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  39.26 3,140.80 81,912  -42.41 3,392.80 88,-484  46.01 3,680.80 95,995  50.15 4,012.00 104,633  54.66 4,372.60 114,043  59.85 4,788.00 124,871  START OF10lh VEAR  
G  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  39,62 3,169.80 82,1163  -42.79 3,423.20 89,277  46.43 3,714.40 96,872  50.60 4,048.00 105,572  55.18 4,412.80 115,086  60.40 4,832.00 126,019  START OF 11111 YEAR  
H  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL*  39.97 3,197.60 83,393  43.18 3,-454,40 90,091  48.85 3,748.00 97,748  51.06 4,084.80 106,532  55.65 4,-452.00 116,108  80.94 4,875.20 127,145  START OF121h YEAR  
HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  • Ratesln>m Longevity Range I and above reflect Trooper 1st Class pay differential.  41.13 3,290.40 85,814  43.56 3,484.80 90,884  47.27 3,781.60 98,624  51.52 4,121.80 107,491  56.15 4,492.00 117,151  81.48 4,918.40 128,272  START OF131h YEAR  
J  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL*  41.50 3,320.00 86,586  43.95 3,518.00 91,697  47.69 3,815.20 99,500  51 .97 4,157.60 108,430  56.85 4,532.00 118,195  82.03 4,962.40 129,419  START OF 14th YEAR  
K  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  41.86 3,348.80 87,337  44.33 3,546.-40 92,490  -48.10 3,848.00 100,356  52.43 4,194.40 109,390  57.1-4 4,571.20 119.217  62.57 5,005.60 130,548  START OF 15th YEAR  
L  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  -42.22 3,377.60 88,088  44.72 3,577.60 93,304  48.52 3,881.60 101,232  52.88 4.230.40 110,329  57.64 4,811.20 120,260  63,12 5,049.60 131,694  START OF 16th YEAR  
M  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL*  42.59 3,407.20 88,860  45.10 3,808.00 94,097  48,94 3,915.20 102,108  53.3-4 4,267.20 111,289  58.14 4,651.20 121,303  63.66 5,092.80 132,820  START OF 17th YEAR  

Page 1 ol 2 
Appendix C (Table 1)  
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA  
STATE POLICE PAYSCHEDULE  
EFFECTIVE JULY I,2014  
PAYSCALE TYPE SP  
Members hired prior to 711/2013  
SPD1  SPOI  SP01  SPOI  SPOI  SP01  SP02  SP04  SP06  SP08  SP09  
TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  CPRL  SRGNT  LIEUT  CPT  MAJOR  YEARS  
lONGEl/llY  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  OF  
RANGE  s  A  B  C  D  E·  E  e  E  E  E  SVC  
N  HOURLY BIWEEKLY  42.95 3,436.00  45.49 3,639.20  49.36 3,948.80  53.80 4,304.00  58.63 4,690.40  84.20 5,136.00  START OF 181h  
ANNUAL'  89,611  94,910  102,985  112,248  122,326  133,947  YEAR  
HOURLY  43.32  45.87  49.78  54.25  59.13  114.75  START  
0  BIWEEKLY  3,465.60  3,669.60  3,982.40  4,340.00  4,730.40  5,180.00  OF 19111  
ANNUAL'  90,383  95,703  103,661  113,187  123,369  135,094  YEAR  
HOURLY  43.116  46.26  50.20  54.71  59.63  65.29  START  
p  BIWEEKLY  3,494.40  3,700.80  4,016,00  4,376.80  4,TT0.40  5,223.20  OF201h  
ANNUAL'  91,134  96,517  104,737  114,147  124,412  136,221  YEAR  
HOURLY  44.04  46.65  50.61  55.16  60.12  65,84  START  
0  BIWEEKLY  3,523.20  3,732.00  4,048.SO  4,412.80  4,809.60  5,287.20  OF2111  
ANNUAL'  91,885  97,331  105,593  1\5,086  125,434  137,369  YEAR  
HOURLY  44.41  47.03  51.03  55.62  60.62  66.38  START  
R  BIWEEKLY  3,552.80  3,762.40  4,082.40  4,449.60  4,849.60  5,310.40  OF 22nd  
ANNUAL•  92,657  98,123  106,469  116,046  126,478  138,495  YEAR  
HOURLY  • Rates hom longevity Range S and  45.21  47.42  51.45  56.03  81.12  116.92  START  
s  BIWEEKLY  above Rifted MaslerTrooper  3,816.80  3,793.60  4,116.00  4,488.40  4,889.60  5,353.60  OF23rd  
ANNUAL'  pay differential  94,328  98,937  107,345  117,005  127,521  139,622  YEAR  
HOURLY  45.58  47.80  51.87  58.53  81,62  87.47  START  
T  BIWEEKLY  3,848.40  3,82<4.00  4,149.60  4,522.40  4,929.60  5,397.60  OF24111  
ANNUAL'  95,098  99,730  108,222  117,944  128,584  140,769  YEAR  
HOURLY  45,95  48.19  52.29  58.99  62.11  68.01  START  
u  BIWEEKLY  3,878.00  3,855.20  4,163.20  4,559.20  4,968.60  5,440.80  OF 25lh  
ANNUAL'  95,870  100,544  109,098  118,904  129,586  141,896  YEAR  
HOURLY  46.32  48.57  52.71  57.44  62.61  68.58  START  
V  BIWEEKLY  3,705.60  3,885.60  4,216.80  4,595.20  5,008.80  5,484.80  OF26lh  
ANNUAL'  96,642  101,336  109,974  119,843  130,630  143,044  YEAR  
HOURLY  48.69  48.98  53.12  57.90  113.11  89.10  START  
w  BIWEEKLY  3,735.20  3,916.80  4,249.60  4,632.00  5,048.80  5,528.00  OF 27lh  
ANNUAL'  97,414  102,150  110,830  120,803  131,673  144,170  YEAR  
HOURLY  47.05  49.34  53.54  58.36  63.80  69.64  START  
X  BIWEEKLY  3,764.00  3,947.20  4,283.20  4,668.80  5,088.00  5,571.20  OF 28th  
ANNUAL' • Annual rates listed onlhl$ schedule are appnixlmale,  98,165  102,943  111,706  121,762  132,895  145.297  YEAR  

Page2of2 
Appendix C (Table 2) 
COMMONWEAL TH OF PENNSYLVANIA STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE EFFECTIVE JULY I,2014 PAY SCALE TYPE SP Membe,s hired on o,alter7/1/2D13  
LONGEVITY RANGE  SPOI TROOPER STEP s  SP01 TROOPER STEP A  SPOI TROOPER STEP B  SP01 TROOPER STEP C  SP01 TROOPER STEP D  SPOI TROOPER STEP e·  SP02 CPRL STEP E  SP04 SRGNT STEP E  SP06 LIEUT STEP E  SP08 CPT STEP E  SP09 MAJOR STEP E  YEARS OF SVC  
A  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  26.77 2,141.80 55,853  28.55 2.284.00 59,587  30.34 2,427.20 63,301  32.12 2,569.80 67,015  33.91 2,712.80 70,750  35.69 2,855.20 74,484  38.55 3,084.00 80,431  41.83 3,348.4D 87,274  45.59 3,847.20 95,119  49.89 3,975.20 103,673  54.41 4,352.8D 113,521  YEARS 1 THROUGH 5  
B  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  35.94 2,875.20 74,985  37.83 3,028.40 78,929  40.86 3,268.80 85,250  44.34 3,547.20 92,511  48.33 3,866.40 100,836  52.67 4,213.60 109,891  57.67 4,813.60 120,323  START OF61h YEAR  
C  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  38.19 3,055.20 79,680  41.25 3,300.00 88,084  44.78 3,580.80 93,387  48,78 3,902.40 101,775  53.17 4,253.60 110,934  58.22 4,857.60 121,470  START OF 7111 YEAR  
D  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  38.55 3,084.00 80,431  41.83 3,330.40 86,857  45.18 3,814.-40 9-4,284  49.24 3,939.2D 102,734  53.87 4,293.60 111,977  58.78 4,700.80 122,597  START OFBIII YEAR  
E  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  38,90 3,112.00 81,161  42.02 3,361.80 87,671  45.59 3,647.20 95,119  49.89 3.975.20 103,673  54.16 4,332.80 112,999  59.31 4,744.80 123,744  START OF9111 YEAR  
m ""  F  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  39.28 3,140.80 81,912  42.41 3,392.80 88,484  46.01 3,680.80 95,995  50.15 4,012.00 104,633  54.66 4,372.80 114,043  59.85 4,788.00 124,871  START OF 10111 YEAR  
G  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL'  39,62 3,169.60 82,883  42.79 3,423.20 89,277  48.43 3,71-4.40 96,872  50.80 '4,048.00 105,572  55.16 4,412.80 115,088  60.40 4,832.00 128,019  START OF 11111 YEAR  
H  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  39.97 3,197.60 83,393  43.18 3,454.40 90,091  46.85 3,748.00 97,748  51.06 4,084.80 106,532  55.65 4,452.00 118,108  80.9" 4,675.20 127,145  START OF 12111 YEAR  
HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL'  • Rales from Longe\lily Range I and above rallect Trooper 1st Class pay dlffllfllnlial.  41.13 3,290.40 85,814  43.58 3,484.80 90,884  47.27 3,781.80 98,624  51.52 4,121.80 107,491  56.15 4,492.00 117,151  81.48 4,918.40 128,272  START OF 13111 YEAR  
J  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  41.50 3,320.00 88,586  43.95 3,516.00 91,897  47.89 3,815.20 99,500  51.97 4,157.80 108,430  56.65 4,532.00 118,195  82,03 4,98UO 129,419  START OF 14111 YEAR  
K  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  41.88 3,348.80 87,337  44.33 3,546.40 92,490  48.10 3,848.00 100,356  52.43 4,194.40 109,390  57.14 4,571.2D 119.217  82.57 5,005.60 130,548  START OF 151h YEAR  
L  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL'  42.22 3,377.60 88,088  44.72 3,577.60 93,304  48.52 3,881.80 101,232  52,88 4,230.40 110,329  57.64 4,811.20 120,260  83.12 5,049.80 131,694  START OF 18111 YEAR  
M  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  42.59 3,407.20 88,860  45.10 3,608.00 94,097  48.94 3,915.20 102,108  53.34 4,267.20 111,289  58.14 4,851.2D 121,303  83.86 5,092.80 132,820  START OF17111 YEAR  

Page 1 of2 Page2 012 Appendix D {Table 1) 
Appendbt C (Table 2)  
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2014 PAYSCALE TYPE SP Membefshlredon oraller7/l/2013  
LONGEVITY RANGE  $POI TROOPER STEP s  $POI TROOPER STEP A  SP01 TROOPER STEP B  SPOI TROOPER STEP C  SPOI TROOPER STEP D  SP01 TROOPER STEP e·  SP02 CPRL STEP E  SP<M SRGNT STEP E  SP06 LIEUT STEP E  SP08 CPT STEP e  SP09 MAJOR STEP E  YEARS OF SVC  
N  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  42.95 3,438.00 89,611  45.49 3,839.20 94,910  49.36 3,948.80 102,985  53.80 4,30-4.00 112,248  58.83 4,690.40 122.326  84.20 5,136.00 133,947  START OF 18111 YEAR  
0  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  43.32 3,465.60 90,383  45.87 3,689.60 95,703  49.78 3,982.40 103,861  54.25 4,340.00 113,187  59.13 4,730.40 123,369  84.75 5,180.00 135,094  START OF191h YEAR  
p  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  43.68 3,494.40 91,134  46.26 3,700.80 96,517  50.20 4,016.00 104,737  54.71 4,376.80 114,147  59.83 4,770.40 124,412  65.29 5,223.20 138,221  START OF 201h YEAR  
Q  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  44.04 3,523.20 91,885  48.85 3,732.00 97,331  50.61 4,048.80 105,593  55.18 4,412.80 115,088  60.12 4,809.60 125,.34  65.64 5,287.20 137,369  START OF 2111 YEAR  
R  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  44.41 3,552.80 92,657  47,0J 3,762.40 98,123  51.03 4,082.40 106,469  55.62 4,449.80 116,048  60.62 4,8.9.60 126,478  66.38 5,310.40 138,495  START OF 22nd YEAR  
a,, c»  s  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  • RalH ham Longevily Range S and above reflect Master Trooper pay dlft"eranlial  45.21 3,616.80 94,328  47.42 3,793.60 98,937  51.45 4,118.00 107,345  56.08 4,486.40 117,005  61.12 4,889.80 127,521  68.92 5,353.80 139,822  START OF 23rd YEAR  
T  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  45.58 3,846.40 95,098  47.80 3,824.00 99,730  51.87 4,1 .9.60 108.222  58.53 4,522.40 117,944  61.82 4,929.80 128,584  67.47 5,397.60 140,769  START OF 24111 YEAR  
u  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  45.95 3,676.00 95,870  48.19 3,855.20 100,544  52.29 4,183.2D 109,098  56.99 4,559.20 118,904  62.11 .,968.80 129,586  68.01 5,440.80 1 .1,896  START OF 25111 YEAR  
V  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  48.32 3,705.60 96,842  48.57 3,885.60 101,336  52.71 4,216.80 109,974  57.44 4,595.20 119,843  82.61 5,008.80 130,630  68.56 5,48..8D 143,044  START OF 26111 YEAR  
w  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL"  48.69 3,735.20 97,414  48.96 3,918.80 102,150  53.12 4,249.60 110,830  57.90 4,832.00 120,803  63.11 5,048.80 131,673  69.10 5,528.00 144,170  START OF 271h YEAR  
HOURLY X BIWEEKLY ANNUAL• • Annual rales Isled on 1his IIChedule antapproldmate.  47.05 3,764.00 98,165  49.34 3,947.20 102,943  53.54 4,283.20 111,706  58.38 4,668.80 121,762  83,80 5,088.00 132,695  69.84 5,57I,2D 1 .5,297  START OF 28111 YEAR  

COMMONWEAI.Tli OF PENNSYLVANIA  
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE  
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2015  
PAYSCALE TYPE SP  
Members hired prior IO 711/2013  
SP01  SP01  SPOI  SP01  SP01  SP01  SP02  SP04  SP06  SP08  SP09  
TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  CPRL  SRGNT  LIEUT  CPT  MAJOR  YEARS  
LONGEVITY  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  OF  
RANGE  s  A  B  C  D  E"  E  E  E  E  E  SVC  
HOURLY  30.20  31.91  33.65  34.60  35.59  38.58  39.51  42.87  46.73  50.94  55.78  YEARS I  
A  BIWEEKLY  2,418.00  2,552.80  2,692.00  2,768.00  2,847.20  2,926.40  3,160.80  3,429.60  3,738.40  4,075.20  4,482.40  lliROUGH  
ANNUAL"  83,009  88,577  70,207  72,189  74,255  78,321  82,434  89,444  97,497  106,281  116,379  5  
HOURLY  37.73  38.77  41.88  45.44  49.53  54.00  59.13  START  
B  BIWEEKLY  3,018.40  3,101.60  3,350.40  3,635.20  3,962.40  4,320.00  4,730.40  OF61h  
ANNUAL•  76,720  80,890  87,378  94,806  103,339  112,666  123,369  YEAR  
HOURLY  39.14  42.28  45.87  50.00  54.51  59.68  START  
C  BIWEEKLY  3,131.20  3,382.40  3,669.80  4,000.00  4,360.80  4,774.40  Of7111  
ANNUAL"  81,662  88.213  95,703  104,320  113,730  124,516  YEAR  
HOURLY  39.51  42.67  46.30  50.47  55,02  60.24  START  
D  BIWEEKLY  3,160.80  3,413.80  3,704.00  4,037.60  4,401.60  4,819.20  Of8th  
ANNUAL•  82,434  89,027  96,800  105,301  114,794  125,665  YEAR  
HOURLY  39.87  43.07  46.73  50.94  55.52  60,80  START  
E  BIWEEKLY  3,189.80  3,445.60  3,738.40  4,075.20  4,441.60  4,864.00  OF91h  
ANNUAL"  83,185  89,861  97,497  106,281  115,837  126,853  YEAR  
HOURLY  40.24  43.46  47.16  51.40  56.03  81.36  START  
F  BIWEEKLY  3,219.20  3,476.80  3,772.80  4,112.00  4,482.40  4,908.80  OF 10111  
ANNUAL•  83,957  80,675  98,395  107,241  118,901  128,022  YEAR  
HOURLY  40.80  43.86  47.59  51.87  56.54  61.92  START  
G  BIWEEKLY  3,248.00  3,508,8D  3,807.20  4,149.60  4,523.20  4,953.60  OF 11111  
ANNUAL•  84,708  91,510  99,292  108,222  117,965  129,190  YEAR  
HOURLY  40.97  44.25  48.01  52.34  57,05  62.47  START  
H  BIWEEKLY  3,277.80  3,540.00  3,840.80  4,187.20  4,584.00  4.987.60  OF 12111  
ANNUAL'  85,480  92,323  100,168  109,202  119,029  130,337  YEAR  
HOURLY  • Ralesll'Om Longevity Range Iand  42.16  44.65  48.44  52.80  57.56  63.03  START  
BIWEEKLY  above renect Trooper 1 S1 Class  3,372.80  3,572.00  3,875.20  4,224.00  4,604.80  5,042.40  OF 13111  
ANNUAL•  pay dillerenllal.  87,863  93,158  101,065  110,162  120,093  131,506  YEAR  
HOURLY  42.53  45.04  48.87  53.27  58.07  63.59  START  
J  BIWEEKLY  3,402.40  3,603.20  3,909.80  4,261.80  4,645.60  5,087.20  OF 14111  
ANNUAL"  68,735  93,971  101,962  111,143  121,157  132,674  YEAR  
HOURLY  42.91  45.44  49.30  53.74  58.58  B-4.15  START  
K  BIWEEKLY  3,432.80  3,835.20  3,944.00  4,299.20  4,666.40  5,132.00  OF 15111  
ANNUAL•  89.527  94,806  102,860  112,123  122.221  133,843  YEAR  
HOURLY  43.28  45.B3  49.73  54.21  59.09  64.70  START  
L  BIWEEKLY  3,482.40  3,668.40  3,978.40  4,336.80  4,727.20  5,176.00  OF 16111  
ANNUAL•  90,299  95,620  103,757  113,104  123.285  134,990  YEAR  
HOURLY  43,65  46.23  50.18  54.67  59.60  65.26  START  
M  BIWEEKLY  3,492.00  3,898.40  4,012.80  4,373.60  4,768.00  5,220.80  OF 17111  
ANNUAL"  91,071  96,454  104,654  114,063  124,349  138,158  YEAR  

Page 1 of2 
Appendix D {Table 1)  
COMMONWEAI.Ttt OF PENNSYLVANIA  
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE  
EFFECTIVE JULY 1,2015  
PAYSCALE TYPE SP  
Membersllinld pnorto 7/112013  
SPOI  SPOI  SP01  SPOI  SPOI  SPOI  SP02  SP04  SP06  SPOS  SP09  
TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  CPRL  SRGNT  LIEUT  CPT  MAJOR  YEARS  
LONGEVITY  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  OF  
RANGE  s  A  B  C  D  E·  E  E  E  E  E  SVC  
HOURLY  «.03  46.62  50.59  55.14  60.11  65,82  START  
N  BIWEEKLY  3,522.40  3,729.80  4,047.20  4,411.20  4,808.80  5,265.60  OF 18th  
ANNUAL•  91,864  97,288  105,551  115,04-4  125,414  137,327  YEAR  
HOURLY  « .40  47.02  51 .02  55.61  60.62  66.38  START  
0  BIWEEKLY  3,552.00  3,781,80  4,081,60  4,448,80  4,849.60  5,310.40  OF19tl  
ANNUAL•  92,636  98,103  106,448  116,025  126,478  138,495  YEAR  
HOURLY  «.77  -47.41  51.-44  56.08  81.13  66.94  START  
p  BIWEEKLY  3,581.60  3,792.80  4,115.20  4,486.-40  4,890.40  5,355.20  OF 20111  
ANNUAL•  93,408  98,916  107,324  117,005  127,542  13!1,664  YEAR  
HOURLY  -45.15  47.81  51.87  56.54  61.64  67.49  START  
Q  BIWEEKLY  3,612.00  3,824.80  4,149.60  4,523.20  4,931.20  5,399.20  OF 2111  
ANNUAL•  94,201  99,751  108,222  117,965  128.606  140,811  YEAR  
HOURLY  45.52  48.20  52.30  57.01  82.15  88.05  START  
R  BIWEEKLY  3,641.60  3,856.00  4,184.00  4,560.80  4,972.00  5,444.00  OF 22nd  
ANNUAL"  94,973  100,564  109,119  118,948  129,670  141,980  YEAR  
HOURLY  • Rates flOm Longevily Range S and  <CB.JS  48.60  52.73  57.48  62.66  66.61  START  
s  BIWEEKLY  above renect Master Trooper  3,708.00  3,888.00  4,218.40  4,598.40  5,012.80  5,488.80  OF23nl  
ANNUAL•  pay differential  96,705  101,3119  110,018  119,928  130,734  143,148  YEAR  
HOURLY  46.n  48.99  53.16  57.95  63.17  69.17  START  
T  BIWEEKLY  3,737.60  3,919.20  4,252.80  4,636.00  5,053.60  5,533.60  OF 24111  
ANNUAL•  97,477  102,213  110,913  120,907  131,798  14-4,318  YEAR  
HOURLY  47.10  49.39  53.59  58.41  BJ.BB  69.73  START  
u  BIWEEKLY  3,766.00  3,951.20  4,287.20  4,672.60  5,094.40  5,578.40  OF 25111  
ANNUAL•  911,269  103,047  111,810  121,867  132,862  145,485  YEAR  
HOURLY  47.48  49.78  54.02  58.88  64.18  70.28  START  
V  BIWEEKLY  3,798.40  3,9112.40  4,321.60  4,710.40  5,134.40  5,622.40  OF261h  
ANNUAL•  99,082  103,861  112,707  122,847  133,905  146,832  YEAR  
HOURLY  47.85  50.18  54.«  59.35  84.119  70.84  START  
w  BIWEEKLY  3,828.00  4,014.40  4,355.20  4,748.00  5,175.20  5,667.20  OF271h  
ANNUAL•  99,834  104,6911  113,584  123,828  13-4,9119  147,801  YEAR  
HOURLY  48.23  50.57  54.87  59.81  85.20  71.-40  START  
X  BIWEEKLY  3,858.40  4,045.60  4,389.60  4,784.80  5,218.00  5,712.00  OF28111  
ANNUAL•  100,627  105,509  114,481  124,788  136,033  148,969  YEAR  
• Annual rates Isled on lhis schedule are appruxinulte.  

Page2of2 
Appendbc D (Table 2) 
COMMONWEAL TH OF PENNSYLVANIA STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2015 PAY SCALE lYPE SP Members hiredon orafter7/1/2013  
LONGEVITY RANGE  SP01 TROOPER STEP s  SP01 TROOPER STEP A  SP01 TROOPER STEP B  SP01 TROOPER STEP C  SP01 TROOPER STEP D  SP01 TROOPER STEP E·  SP02 CPRL STEP e  SP04 SRGNT STEP E  SP06 LIEUT STEP E  SP08 CPT STEP e  SP09 MAJOR STEP e  YEARS OF SVC  
A  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  27.44 2,195.20 57,251  29.28 2,340.80 81,048  31.09 2,487.20 64,866  32.92 2,633.60 68,684  34.75 2,780.00 72,502  38.58 2,926.40 78,321  39.51 3,160.80 82,434  42.87 3,429.60 89,444  48.73 3,738.40 97,497  50.94 4,075.20 108,281  55.78 4,.62.40 118,379  YEARS 1 'THROUGH 5  
B  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  38.84 2,947.20 76,863  38.77 3,101.60 80,890  . I.BB 3,350.40 87,378  45.44 3,835.20 94,806  49.53 3,982.40 103,339  54.00 4,320.00 112,668  59.13 4,730.40 123,369  START OF 6111 YEAR  
C  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  39.14 3,131.20 81,662  42.28 3,382.40 88,213  45.87 3,669.60 95,703  50.00 4,000.00 104,320  54.51 .,360.80 113,730  59.88 .,77..40 124,518  START OF71h YEAR  
D  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  39.51 3,160.80 82,434  42.87 3,413.60 89,027  48.30 3,704.00 98,600  50.47 4,037.80 105,301  55.02 4,401.80 114,794  60.24 4,819.20 125,685  START OF81h YEAR  
E  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  39.87 3,189.60 83,185  43.07 3,445.60 89,861  46.73 3,738..0 97,497  50,94 4,075.20 106,281  55.52 4,441.60 115,837  60,80 4,864.00 128,853  START OF9th YEAR  
......  F  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  40.24 3,219.20 83,957  43.46 3,478.80 90,875  47.16 3,772.80 98,395  51.40 4,112.00 107.241  58.03 .,482..0 116,901  81.36 4,908.80 128,022  START OF10lh YEAR  
G  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  40.80 3,248.00 84,708  43.88 3,508.80 91,510  47.59 3,807.20 99,292  51.87 4,1 .9.60 108,222  58.54 4,523.20 117,985  61.92 4,953.60 129,190  START OF 11111 YEAR  
H  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  40.97 3,277.80 85,460  44.25 3,540.00 92,323  48.01 3,840.80 100,168  52.34 4,187.20 109,202  57.05 4,564.00 119,029  62.47 4,997.60 130,337  START OF 12th YEAR  
HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  • Rates from Longevity Range Iand above relled Trooper Ut Class paydifferenllal.  42.18 3,372.80 67,963  44.65 3,572.00 93,158  48.44 3,875.20 101,065  52.80 4,22. .00 110,162  57.58 .,60..80 120,093  63.03 5,042.40 131,508  START OF 13th YEAR  
J  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL*  42.53 3,402.40 88,735  45.04 3,603.20 93,971  48.87 3,909.60 101,962  53.27 4,261.60 111,143  58.07 4,645.60 121,157  63.59 5,037.20 132,674  START OF 141h YEAR  
K  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  42.91 3,432.80 89,527  45.44 3,635.20 94,806  49.30 3,944.00 102,860  53.74 4,299.20 112.123  58.58 4,686.40 122.221  114.15 5,132.00 133,843  START OF151h YEAR  
l  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  43.28 3,462.40 90,299  45.83 3,866.40 95,620  49.73 3,978.40 103,757  54.21 4,338.80 113,104  59,09 4,727.20 123,285  84,70 5,178.00 134,990  START OF181h YEAR  
M  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  43.85 3,492.00 91,071  48.23 3,698.40 98,454  50.16 4,012.80 104,854  54.67 4,373.60 114,063  59.60 4,788.00 124,349  65.26 5,220.80 136,158  START OF 17th YEAR  

Page 1012 Appendix D (Table 2) 
COMMONWEAL1HOF PENNSYI.VANIA STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE EFFECTIVE JULY 1,2015 PAYSCALE TYPE SP Members hired on or alter7/1/2013 
SP01 SP0I SP01 SP01 SP01 SP01 SP02 SP04 SP06 
SP08 SP09 
TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER 'mOOPER 'mOOPER 'mOOPER CPRL SRGNT LIEUT CPT MAJOR YEARS 
LONGEVITY STEP STEP STEP STEP STEP STEP STEP STEP STEP STEP STEP OF 
RANGE s A B C D e· E E E E E SVC 
HOURLY 44,03 
48.62 
50.59 
55.14 
80.11 
65.82 START 
N BIWEEKLY 3,522.40 3,728.80 
4.047.20 
4,411.20 
4,803.80 
5,265.60 OF1Bth 
ANNUAL• 91,864 
97,288 
105,551 115,044 125,414 137,327 YEAR 
HOURLY 44.40 
47.02 
51.02 
55.61 
60.62 
86.38 START 
0 BIWEEKLY 3,552.00 3,781.60 
4,031.80 4,448.80 4,849.60 
5,310.40 OF 19111 
ANNUAL• 92,636 88,103 108,448 116,025 128,478 
138,495 YEAR 
HOURLY 44.77 
47.41 
51.44 
58.08 
61.13 
86.94 START 
p 
BIWEEKLY 3,581.60 3,792.80 4,115.20 
4,486.40 4,890.40 
5,355.20 OF 201h 
ANNUAL• 93,403 96,816 107,324 117,005 127,542 139,864 YEAR 
HOURLY 45.15 
47.81 
51.87 
56.54 
61.64 
67.49 START 
Q BIWEEKLY 3,612.00 
3,824.80 4,149.60 
4,523.20 4,931.20 5,399.20 OF 21s1 
ANNUAL• 94,201 99,751 103,222 117,985 
128.606 
140,811 YEAR 
HOURLY 45.52 
48.20 
52.30 
57.01 
62.15 
68.05 START 
R BIWEEKLY 3,641,60 
3,856.00 4,184.00 4,560.80 4,972.00 5,444.00 OF 22nd 
ANNUAL• 94,973 
100,564 
109,119 118,948 128,!170 141,980 YEAR 
HOURLY • Rates Imm Longevity Range S and 46.35 
48.60 
52.73 
57.46 
82.86 
68.61 START 
s BIWEEKLY above nilled Master Trooper 3,708.00 
3.888.00 4,218.40 4,598.40 
5,012.80 
5,488.80 OF23rd
;j 
ANNUAL" pay dift'erential 98,705 101,399 110,016 119,928 130,734 143,148 YEAR 
HOURLY 46.72 
48.99 
53.16 
57.95 
63.17 
69.17 START 
T BIWEEKLY 3,737.60 3,919.20 
4,252.80 4,636.00 
5,053.60 5,533.60 OF 24111 
ANNUAi." 97,477 102,213 110,913 120,907 131,798 144,318 YEAR 
HOURLY 47.10 
49,39 
53.59 
56.41 
83.68 
69.73 START 
u BIWEEKLY 3,768.00 3,951.20 
4,672.80
4,287.20 
5,094.40 
5,578.40 OF 25th 
ANNUAL• 98,269 103,047 111,810 121,867 132,862 
145,465 YEAR 
HOURLY 47.48 
48.78 
54,02 
58.88 
64.18 
70.28 START 
V BIWEEKLY 3,798.40 3,982.40 4,321.60 4,710.40 5,134.40 5,622.40 OF 26th 
ANNUAL' 99,062 103,861 112,707 122,847 133,905 146,832 YEAR 
HOURLY 47.85 
50.18 
54.44 
59.35 
64.69 
70.64 START 
w BIWEEKLY 3,828.00 
4,014.40 
4,355.20 4,748.00 5,175.20 5,667.20 OF 271h 
ANNUAL• 99,1134 104,696 113,584 123,828 134,989 147.801 YEAR 
HOURLY 48.23 
50.57 
S.4.117 
59.81 
85.20 
71.40 START 
X BIWEEKLY 3,858.40 4,045.60 
4,389,60 
4,784.80 5,218.00 5,712.00 OF 28th 
ANNUAL• 100,627 105,509 114,481 124,788 136,033 148,989 YEAR 
• Annual rales Isled on lhts schedule are approodmale. 
Page 2012 
Appendix E (Table 1) 
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNS'ttVANIA  
STATE POLICE PAYSCHEDULE  
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2016  
PAYSCALE TYPE SP  
Memben; hlled prior to 7/1/2013  
SP01  SP0I  SP01  SP01  SP01  SP01  SP02  SP04  SP06  SPoa  SP09  
TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  TROOPER  CPRL  SRGNT  LIEUT  CPT  MAJOR  YEARS  
LONGEVITY  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  STEP  OF  
RANGE  s  A  B  C  D  E·  E  E  E  E  E  SVC  
HOURLY  31.11  32.B7  34.88  35.64  38.88  37.68  40.69  «.15  48.12  52.45  57.43  YEARS I  
A  BIWEEKLY  2,488.80  2,629.60  2,772.80  2,851.20  2,932.80  3,014.40  3,255.20  3,532.00  3,849.60  4,196.00  4,594.40  THROUGH  
ANNUAL•  64,908  68,580  72,315  74,359  76,487  7B,616  84,896  92,115  100,398  109,432  119,822  5  
HOURLY  38.86  39.94  43,13  48,80  51.01  55.60  60.88  START  
B  BIWEEKLY  3,108.80  3,195.20  3,450.40  3,7«.oo  4,080,80  4,448,00  4,870.40  OF 6111  
ANNUAL•  81,078  83,331  89,986  97,644  108,427  116,004  127,020  YEAR  
HOURLY  40.32  43.54  47.24  51.49  58.12  81.45  START  
C  BIWEEKLY  3,225.60  3,483.20  3,779.20  4,119.20  4,489.60  4,918.00  OF71h  
ANNUAL•  84,124  90,842  98,582  107,429  117,089  128,209  YEAR  
HOURLY  40.89  43.95  47.68  51.97  58.85  82.02  START  
D  BIWEEKLY  3,255.20  3,518.00  3,814.40  4,157.60  4,532.00  4,961.60  OF8th  
ANNUAL•  84,896  91,697  99,480  108,430  118,195  129,399  YEAR  
HOURLY  41.07  44.35  48.12  52.45  57.17  62.60  START  
E  BIWEEKLY  3,285.60  3,548.00  3,849.60  4,196.00  4,573.80  5,008.00  OF9th  
ANNUAL•  85,688  92,532  100,398  109,432  119,279  130.609  YEAR  
HOURLY  41.45  «.78  48.57  52.93  57.70  63.17  START  
F  BIWEEKLY  3,318.00  3,580.80  3,885.60  4.234.40  4,616.00  5,053.60  OF10th  
ANNUAL•  88,481  93,387  101,338  110,433  120.385  131,798  YEAR  
HOURLY  41.82  45.17  49.01  53.41  58.22  83.75  START  
G  BIWEEKLY  3,345.60  3,813.60  3,920.80  4,272.80  4,857.80  5,100.00  OF 11111  
ANNUAL•  87,253  94,243  102,254  111,435  121,470  133,008  YEAR  
HOURLY  42.20  .CS.57  49.45  53.89  58.74  64.32  START  
H  BIWEEKLY  3,378.00  3,645.60  3,958.00  4,311.20  4.899.20  5,145.80  OF 12th  
ANNUAL•  88,048  95,077  103,172  112,438  122,555  134,197  YEAR  
HOURLY  • Rates hum Longevity Range I and  43.43  45.98  49.89  54.38  59.27  64.90  START  
BIWEEKLY  abovereflect Trooper 1st Class  3,474.40  3,678.40  3,991.20  4,350.40  4,7.C1.60  5,192.00  OF 13111  
ANNUAL•  pay differential.  90,812  115,933  104,090  113,458  123,881  135,.C07  YEAR  
HOURLY  43.81  46.39  50.33  54.86  59.79  85..C7  START  
J  BIWEEKLY  3,50.c.B0  3,711.20  4,026.40  4,388.80  4,783.20  5,237.80  OF 14th  
ANNUAL"  91,.COS  96,788  105,009  114,460  124,746  136,597  YEAR  
HOURLY  44.19  46.79  50.77  55.34  60.32  88.04  START  
K  BIWEEKLY  3,535.20  3,743.20  4,061.60  4,427.20  4,825.60  5,283.20  OF15lh  
ANNUAL•  92,198  97,623  105,927  115,.C61  125,852  137,788  YEAR  
HOURLY  «.58  47.20  51.21  55.82  60,84  118.62  START  
L  BIWEEKLY  3,588.40  3,776.00  4,096.80  4,465.60  4,867.20  5.329.80  OF161h  
ANNUAL"  93.012  98,478  108,845  11M63  126,937  138,996  VEAR  
HOURLY  «.96  47.81  51.118  58.30  61.37  67.19  START  
M  BIWEEKLY  3,596.80  3,808.60  4,132.60  4,504.00  4,909.60  5,375.20  OF 17111  
ANNUAL"  93,805  99,334  107,783  117,464  128,0.C2  140,185  VEAR  

Page 1 of2 
Appendbc E (Table 1) 
COMMONWEAL1H OF PENNSYLVANIA STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2016 PAY SCALE T'tl'E SP Members hirad prior1o 7/1/2013 
SPOI SPOI SPOI SP01 SP01 SP01 SP02 SPIM SP06 SP08 
SP09 TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER 
CPRL SRGNT CPTLIEUT 
w.JOR YEARS LONGEVITY STEP STEP STEP STEP STEP STEP 
STEP STEP STEP STEP 
STEP OF RANGE s A e C D E· 
E 
E 
E E E SVC 
HOURLY .5.35 
52.10 
56.78 
61.89 
.8.01 
67.77 START N BIWEEKLY 3,828.00 
3,8.0.80 
.,168.00 
4,951.20 
5,421.60 OF181h ANNUAL• 94,618 
.,5.2.40 
100,168 108,701 118,466 
1211,127 
141,395 YEAR 
HOURLY .5.73 
.CB.42 
57.26 
62.42 
68.34 START 0 BIWEEKLY 3,658 . .CO 
5Z.5. 
4,203,2D3,873.60 
.C,58D.80 
4,993.60 
5,467.2D OF 19111 ANNUAL• 95,411 
101,023 109,619 lt9,.C67 
130,233 142,585 YEAR 
HOURLY 46.12 
48.83 
57,74
52.98 
62.94 
68.92 START p BIWEEKLY 3,689.60 
3,906.40 
4,238.40 
.C,619.20 5,035.20 
5,513.60 OF 20111 ANNUAL• 96,225 
101,879 110,537 120,469 131,318 143,795 YEAR 
HOURLY 46.50 
49.23 
53.42 
58.23 
63.46 
69.49 START a BIWEEKLY 3,720.00 
3,938 . .CD 
4,273.60 
.C,658..CO 
5.076.80 
5,559.20 OF 2111 ANNUAL• 97,018 
102,713 111,455 121,491 132,403 
144,984 YEAR 
HOURLY .C6.88 
49,64 
53.86 
58.71 
63.99 
7D.06 START R BIWEEKLY 3,750.40 
4,308,80
3,971.20 
4,696.80 
5,119.20 
5,604.80 OF 22nd ANNUAL• 97,810 
103,569 112,374 122,493 133,509 146,173 YEAR 
HOURLY • Rates ln>m Longeviy Range S and 47.7.C 
50.05 
54.30 
59.19 
64.51 
7D.64 START s BIWEEKLY above relled Master Trooper 3,819.20 
4,0IM.00 
4,344.00 
..735.20 
5,160.80 
5,651.20 OF 23rd
~ 
ANNUAL• pay dilrerentlal. 99,605 
11M,424 
113,292 123,494 134,594 147,383 YEAR 
HOURLY 48.12 
50.46 
54.75 
59.67 
65.04 
71.21 START T BIWEEKLY 3,849.60 
4,036.80 
.C,380.00 
.C,773.60 5,203.20 
5,896.80 OF 24111 ANNUAL• 100,398 
105,280 
11<1,230 
12.C,495 
148,573 YEAR135.699 
HOURLY 48.51 
50.86 
55.19 
60.15 
65.58 
71.79 START u BIWEEKLY 3,880.80 
.C,068.80 4,415.20 
4,812.00 
5,244.80 
5,743.20 OF 25111 ANNUAL• 101,211 
106,114 
115,1.C8 
125,.c97 
138,784 1-49,783 YEAR 
HOURLY .CB.90 
51.27 
55.113 
60.63 
66.09 
72.36 START V BIWEEKLY 3,912.00 
4,101.60 
4,450 . .CO 
4,850.40 
5,287.20 
5,788.80 OF 26111 ANNUAL• 102,025 
108,970 
126,-498
116,068 137,890 150,972 YEAR 
HOURLY 49.29 
51.68 
58.07 
61.11 
66.61 
72.94 START w BIWEEKLY 3,943.20 
4,134.40 
4,485,60 4,888.80 
5,328.80 
5,835.20 OF 27111 ANNUAL• 102,839 
1D7,825 116,984 127,500 138,975 152,182 YEAR 
HOURLY .C9.68 
52.08 
56.51 
61.59 
67.14 
73.51 START X BIWEEKLY 3,974.40 
4,166.40 
4,520.80 
4,927.20 
5,371.20 
5,880.80 OF 28111 ANNUAL• 103,652 
108,660 117,902 128,501 140,081 153,371 YEAR 
• Annual ratesisled an 11\ls schedule are approJCimate. 
Page2 ol 2 Appendix E (Table 2) 
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2016 PAY SCALE 'M'E SP Members hired on or after 7/1/2013  
LONGEVITY RANGE  SPOI TROOPER STEP s  SPOI TROOPER STEP A  SP01 TROOPER STEP B  SPOI TROOPER STEP C  SP01 TROOPER STEP 0  SP01 TROOPER STEP E·  SP02 CPRL STEP E  SP04 SRGNT STEP E  SP06 LIEUT STEP E  SPOa CPT STEP E  SP09 MAJOR STEP E  YEARS OF SVC  
A  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  28.26 2.260.80 58,1162  30.14 2,411.20 62,B84  32.03 2,562.40 86,827  33.91 2,712.80 70,750  35.80 2,B84,00 74,693  37.68 3,014.40 7B,616  40.89 3,255.20 84,8116  44.15 3,532.00 92,115  48.12 3,849.60 100.398  52.45 4,196.00 109,432  57.,43 4,594.40 118,822  YEARS1 THROUGH 5  
B  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  37.95 3,038.00 79,179  39.IM 3,185.20 83,331  43.13 3,450.40 89,986  46.B0 3,744.00 97,64.  51.01 4,080.80 106,427  55.60 4,ffl.00 116,004  60.B8 . ,870..0 127,020  START OF61h YEAR  
C  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  40.32 3,225.60 B4,124  43.5. 3,463.20 90,842  47.24 3,779.20 98,562  51.49 4,119.20 107,429  56.12 4.489.60 117,089  61.45 4,916.00 128,209  START OF7111 YEAR  
0  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  40.69 3,255.20 84,8116  43.95 3,516.00 91 ,697  47.68 3,814.40 99,460  51.97 4,157.60 108,430  56.65 4,532.00 118,195  62.02 4,961.60 129,399  START OF8111 YEAR  
E  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  41.07 3,285.60 85,688  44.35 3,548,00 92,532  48.12 3,849.60 100,398  52.45 4,196.00 109,432  57.17 4,573.60 119.279  62.60 5,008,00 130,609  START Of 9111 YEAR  
..... Ui  F  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  41.45 3,316.00 86,4B1  44.76 3,580.80 93,387  48,57 3,885.60 101,338  52.93 4.234.40 110,433  57.70 4,6111.00 120,385  63.17 5,053.60 131,798  START OF 10th YEAR  
G  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  41.82 3,345.60 87.253  45.17 3,1113.60 94,243  49.01 3,920.80 102,254  53.41 4,272.80 111,435  58.22 4,657.60 121,470  63.75 5,100.00 133,008  START OF 11111 YEAR  
H  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  42.20 3,376.00 118,046  .5.57 3,845,60 95,077  49.45 3,956.00 103,172  53.89 4,311.20 112,436  58.74 4,699.20 122,555  64.32 5,145.60 134,197  START OF 12111 YEAR  
HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  • Rates from Longevity Range I and above rafted Trooper 111 Class pay differential  43.43 3,474.40 90,612  45.98 3,678.40 95,933  49.89 3,991.20 104.090  54.38 4,350.40 113,458  511.27 4,741 .60 123,861  84,90 5,192.00 135,407  START OF 13111 YEAR  
J  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  43.81 3,504.80 91,405  .6.39 3,711.20 116,788  50.33 4,026.40 105,009  54.B6 4,388.80 114,460  59.79 4,783.20 124,748  65.47 5.237.60 136,597  START OF 14111 YEAR  
K  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  44.19 3,535.20 92,198  46.711 3,743.20 97,623  50,77 4,061.60 105.927  55.34 4,427.20 115,481  60.32 4,825.60 125,852  66.04 5,283.20 137.786  START OF 15th YEAR  
L  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  44.56 3,568.40 93,012  47.2D 3,776.00 98,478  51.21 4,096.80 106,845  55.82 4,465.60 116,463  60.84 4.867.20 128.937  66.112 5,329.60 138,9116  START OF 18th YEAR  
M  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  44,116 3,598.80 93,B05  47.81 3,808.80 99,334  51.86 4,132.60 107,783  56.30 4,504.00 117.464  61.37 4,909.60 126,042  67.19 5,375.20 140,185  START OF 171h YEAR  

Page 1 of2 
Appendix E (Table 2)  
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE EFFECTIVE JULY 1,2018 PAY SCALE TYPE SP Membe,s hired on oraner71112013  
LONGEVITY RANGE  SP01 TROOPER STEP s  SPOI TROOPER STEP A  SP01 TROOPER STEP B  SPOI TROOPER STEP C  SP01 TROOPER STEP D  SP01 TROOPER STEP E·  SP02 CPRL STEP E  SP04 SRGNT STEP E  SPOIi LIEUT STEP E  SP08 CPT STEP E  SP09 MAJOR STEP E  YEARS OF SVC  
N  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  45.35 3.628.00 94,1118  48.01 3,840,110 100,168  52.10 4,168.00 108,701  56.78 4,542.40 118,468  81.119 <l,951.20 129,127  &1.n 5,421.60 141,395  START OF 18111 YEAR  
0  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  45.73 3,658.40 95,411  48.42 3,873.60 101,023  52.54 <l,203.20 109,1119  57.26 4,580.80 119,467  62.42 <l,993.60 130,233  68.34 5,467.20 142,585  START OF 191h YEAR  
p  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  411.12 3,689.60 98,225  48.83 3,906.40 101,879  52.98 4,238.40 110,537  57.74 4,619.20 120,469  112.94 5,035.20 131,318  68.92 5,513.60 143,795  START OF201h YEAR  
a  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  46.50 3,720.00 97,018  49.23 3,938.40 102,713  53.42 4,273.60 111,455  58.23 4,658.40 121,491  63,46 5,076.80 132,403  89,49 5,559.20 1«,984  START OF 21st YEAR  
R  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  46.88 3,750.40 97,810  49.64 3,971.20 103,569  53.88 <l,308,80 112,374  58,71 4,898.80 122,493  83,99 5,119.20 133,509  70.06 5,604.80 148,173  START OF 22nd YEAR  
... 0)  s  HOURLY BIWEEKl.Y ANNUAL•  • Rates Imm Longevty Range Sand above iellectMaster Trooper pay dilrerenliaL  47.74 3,819.20 99,605  50.05 4,004.00 104,424  54,30 4,3«.00 113,292  59.19 4,735.20 123,494  64,51 5,160.80 134,594  70.64 5,651.20 147,383  START OF 23rd YEAR  
T  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  48.12 3,849.60 100,398  50.<l8 4,038.80 105,280  54.75 4,380.00 114,230  59.87 4,n3.60 124,495  65.04 5,203.20 135,899  71.21 5,698.80 148,573  START OF 24111 YEAR  
u  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  <l8.51 3,880.80 101,211  50.88 4,068.80 106,114  55.19 <l,415.20 115,148  60.15 4,812.00 125,497  65.58 5,244.80 138,784  71 .711 5,743.20 149,783  START OF 25111 YEAR  
V  HOURLY BIWEEKl.Y ANNUAL•  48.90 3,912.00 102,025  51.27 <l,101.60 106,1170  55.83 4,450.40 118,068  60.63 050.40 126,4118  68.09 5.287.20 137,890  72.38 5,788.80 150,972  START OF 26111 YEAR  
w  HOURLY BIWEEKLY ANNUAL•  49.29 3,943.20 102,839  51.68 4,134.40 107,825  58.07 4,485.80 116,98<l  61.11 4,888.80 127,500  68.61 5,328.80 138,975  72.94 5,835.20 152,182  START OF 27111 YEAR  
HOURLY X BIWEEKLY ANNUAL• • Annual rates istec:t on 1111s schedule aie approximate.  49.68 3,974.40 103,652  52.08 4,168.40 108,680  56.51 4,520.80 117,902  81.59 4,927.20 128,501  67,14 5,371.20 140,081  73,51 5,880,80 153,371  START OF 28111 YEAR  

Page2of2 
APPENDIXF 
Members of the Pennsylvania State Police must be morally and ethically above reproach at all times regardless of duty status. All members shall respect the sanctity of the law and shall be committed to holding themselves to the highest standard of accountability. No member shall depart from standards ofprofessional conduct or disobey the law. 
Members should be subject to disciplinary action only for "just cause." The following standards shall govern the elements of"just cause" for the misconduct described below and these standards shall constitute a "clean slate" relating to the twelve terminable offenses described below in that they shall supersede and replace all prior standards, agreements, past practices, and arbitration awards on the same subjects. 
Certain conduct immediately and absolutely threatens the integrity of the Department's public duty and responsibility. In the following circumstances, the proper level of discipline is termination of employment, notwithstanding any mitigating circumstances. Such conduct includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
[l] Engaging in any action that constitutes the comm1ss1on of a felony or a misdemeanor which carries a potential sentence of more than one (1) year, or in any action that constitutes the commission of an equivalent offense in another jurisdiction, state, or territory. Neither a criminal conviction nor the pendency ofcriminal charges is necessary for disciplinary action in such circumstances. In addition, a declination of prosecution shall not preclude disciplinary action. 
[2] Engaging in domestic violence involving physical abuse of any victim; or engaging in activity which would cause a reasonable person to be in fear of bodily injury to the extent the member's conduct falls under subsection [l] above. 
[3] Any use of a firearm to threaten another except as appropriate in the scope of employment (whether or not a specific, officially assigned, duty) or in the defense of self or others. This includes the use of a loaded or unloaded firearm to threaten another, regardless whether as a joke or in horseplay. 
[4] Engaging in sexual misconduct, as defined in AR 4-25; or engaging in sexual harassment as defined in AR 4-26 which is ofa serious nature, including use ofposition to obtain or attempt to obtain sexual favors; or engaging in conduct which constitutes sexual harassment, as defined in AR 4-26, subsequent to disciplinary action for prior serious sexual harassment. 
[5] The commission of a serious act of deception during a criminal, civil or administrative investigation or proceeding, when under a specific, official obligation to be truthful, involving intentional (1) lying; (2) fabrication; (3) misleading acts or words; (4) civil or criminal fraud; or (5) perjury. 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, no member may be subject to disciplinary charges for violating this subsection in regard to a statement or statements the member made in a Departmental disciplinary investigation involving another member before the allegations involving the underlying investigation of that other member have been either dismissed by the Department or sustained or dismissed by an arbitrator as provided herein. 
[6] Any activity that constitutes an intentional violation of Chapter 39 of the Crimes Code (relating to Theft and Related Offenses). 
[7] Any use of any illegal substances, prohibited under 35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq., (Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act), or any substance use that constitutes the commission of an offense under Federal law or in any other jurisdiction, state, or territory, either on or off duty; or any use of controlled substances obtained by illegal means, either on or off duty. 
[8] Positive drug test result under FR 3-5. 
[9] "Driving under the influence" pleas, convictions or ARD under one of the following circumstances: 
(a) 
Second or subsequent DUI offense while employed by the Commonwealth (regardless ofwhether on or offduty); or 

(b) 
Involving a hit and run of a vehicle or property; or 

(
c) While operating a state-owned vehicle. 


[ 1 O] Loss of Pennsylvania operating privileges for 180 or more days, except for recall or suspension of operating privileges of any person whose incompetency has been established under Title 75 Pa. C.S. § 1519 (Motor Vehicle Code). 
[11] Fighting or the use ofother physical violence on the job, other than as reasonably necessary in the strict performance ofa member's duties as a law enforcement officer. 
[12] Any period of incarceration for a misdemeanor conviction that results in the member being disqualified from accessing information from the CLEAN system in accordance with the FBI Criminal Justice Information Security (CJIS) Policy. 
This list is not all-inclusive and termination of employment may be the proper level of discipline in other situations as well. 
A criminal standard of proof shall not be applied to the review of any termination decision. 
The above provisions are effective for discipline arising out of any conduct occurring, in full or in part, on or after January 1, 2005. These provisions supersede any prior disciplinary penalties imposed for the twelve (12) offenses specifically set forth herein, by either the Department, Commonwealth, or any arbitrator, and no such prior penalties may be used as precedent in cases involving the above twelve (12) offenses. 
APPENDIXG 
KEY 
DATE OF EFFECTIVE NO. ARBITRATOR AWARD/AGREEMENT DATE I Galfand 12/21/70 7/1/71 2 Gershenfeld 12/28/71 7/1/72 3 By Agreement 9/27/72 7/1/73 4 Gershenfeld 12/27/73 7/1/74 5 Unterberger 12/27/74 7/1/75 5a Letter of 
Agreement 5/10/75 1/1/76 Sb By Agreement 5/21/75 1/1/76 6 By Agreement 11/12/75 7/1/76 7 Loewenberg 12/23/76 7/1/77 8 McDennott 3/24/78 7/1/78 9 Powell 12/21/78 7/1/79 10 By Agreement 11/15/79 7/1/80 IOA By Agreement 6/13/80 7/1/80 
(to clarify language) 11 Weinstein 5/7/81 7/1/81 12 By Agreement 12/14/81 7/1/82 12a Side Letter of 
Agreement 3/2/82 2/1/82 12b Side Letter of 
Agreement 7/1/83 1/1/82 13 Herring 9/15/83 7/1/83 14 K.asher 3/22/84 7/1/84 14a Side Letter of 
Agreement 3/15/84 7/1/84 14b Side Letter of 
Agreement 4/13/84 4/13/84 15 Pereles 12/14/84 7/1/85 16 By Agreement 10/15/85 7/1/86 17 Dilauro 2/17/88 7/1/88 17a Side Letter of 
Agreement 2/26/88 7/1/88 17b Side Letter of 
Agreement 8/29/89 8/29/89 18 By Agreement 12/1/89 7/1/90 18a Side Letters of 
Agreement 5/10/90 7/1/90 18b Side Letter of Agreement 5/25/90 7/1/90 
80 
DATE OF EFFECTIVE NO. ARBITRATOR AW ARD/AGREEMENT DATE 18c Side Letter of 
Agreement 9/13/90 10/1/90 19 Dilauro 6/15/92 7/1/92 19a Letter of 1/26/93 7/1/92 
Agreement 19A By Agreement 11/24/92 7/1/94 19b Letter of 6/16/93 8/15/93 
Agreement 19c Letter of 6/23/93 6/23/93 Agreement 19d Letter of 1/11/94 1/1/94 
Agreement 20 Schwartz 7/11/95 7/1/95 20a Side Letter of 5116/96 5/16/96 
Agreement 20b Side Letter of 6/12/96 6/12/96 Agreement 20c Side Letter of 5/5/97 5/5197 Agreement 20d Side Letter of 5/28/97 6/28/97 Agreement 20e Side Letter of 11/5/97 11/5/97 Agreement 20f Side Letter of 12/11/97 12/11/97 Agreement 20g Side Letter of 1/6/98 1/6/98 Agreement 20h Side Letter of 
Agreement 1/26/98 1/26/98 20A Schwartz 8/29/97 12/29/97 21 By Agreement 10/7/97 7/1/98 22 By Agreement 1/7/00 7/1/00 22A Side Letter of 8/31/00 7/1/00 
Agreement 23 Colflesh 12/22/04 7/1/04 24 Skonier 12/24/08 7/1/08 
25 Side Letter of 3/25/11 3/25/11 
Agreement 26 Talarico 06/27/13 7/1/12 27 Side Letter of 11/26/14 7/1/14 
Agreement 
81 
INDEX OF REFERENCES TO ARBITRATION AWARDS AND AGREEMENTS 
Recognition .................... 1 0A 
Prior Arbitration Awards & Agreements Section 1.. .................. 3,4,6,7,11,12 Section 2 .................... 9,12 
Distribution ofBooklet........4,1 0A, 12 
Salaries Section 1 .................... 23 Section 2 .................... 23 Section 3 ...............23 Section 4 ...............23 Section 5 .................... 17,lSa Section 6 ................... .l,2,3,4,6,8,15,16,18,19,20, 24 Section 7 .................... 5a,10A, 26 Section 8 ....................11,14a,22A Section 9 .................... 1,1 0A,20f,22A Section 10...................23, 26 Section 11. .............. 24 
Union Security & Assessments Section 1.................... 2,8,9,13,l 7b Section 2 .................... 17b Section 3 .................... 17b Section 4 .................... 10 
Scheduling Section 1 .................... 9,17b Section 2 .................... 9,13,20,22A Section 3 .................... 9,11,20, 26 Section 4 .................... 8,20 Section 5 .................... 4 Section 6 ...............17,23 Section 7 .................... 17,22A Section 8 ..................... 23 
Overtime Section 1.. ................. .1, 10A Section 2 ................... .4 Section 3 ................... .5,I0A 
Shift Differential Section 1 .................... 5,5a,6, 15,23 Section 2 .................... Sa Section 3 .................... 23, 24 
Call Time ...................... 3,1OA,19,19a,20, 26 
82 
Alert Time Section 1 .................... 2, 1 0A Section 2 .................... 1,10A 
Holidays Section 1.. ................. .3, lOA,11,12,13, 26 Section 2 .................... 3 Section 3 .................... 3 Section 4 ................... .4,9,10,lOA,14b,20 
Personal Days Section 1 ................... 4,9,10A, 12,13,16,18,19,19a,20,20b,22A, 26 Section 2 ................... lOA,20,23 Section 3 ...............20b 
Vacations Section l....................2,4,10A,12b,16,18,19, 19a, 20,22A Section 2 ................... .l,7,10A,12,l2b,19,l 9a,20,22A Section 3 .................... 9,l0A Section 4 .................... 8,1OA Section 5 .................... 4,8,l0A,20 Section 6 .................... 8 Section 7 .................... 12 Section 8 .................... 20b 
Sick Leave 
Section 1 .................... 1,I 0A,12b,20 Section 2 ................... .1,9,10,12,12b,13,14,15,16,l 7,19,20 Section 3 ................... .4,lOA, 24 Section 4 .................... 8,13, 24 Section 5 .................... 6,9, l 0,12,12a, 13,14,15,16,17,20 Section 6 .................... 17 Section 7 .................... l 8b Section 8 .................... 20b 
Medical Leave Extension Section 1 .................... 7 ,8, lOA,19d,20f,20g,23 Section 2 ................... .12, l 9d,23 Section 3 .................... 7 ,8, 1 0A, 19d,20g Section 4 .................... 20f 
Life Insurance ................. 1,2,10A,23 
Survivor Benefits~ PSTA Scholarship Fund Section 1 ....................8,13,19,19c,22A,23 Section 2 .................... 17,18a, 19c, 25 
Disability Benefits Section 1 .................... 2, 1 0A,22A Section 2 .................... 7,22A 
Hospital & Medical Insurance...1,2,3,7,10,l l,12,13,16,17, 24, 26 Prescription Drug Plan ............ 5a,5b,10,22A,23, 24, 26 
83 
Vision Care Plan ............... 7,10,l l,12,17,19,22A Dental Care Plan ............. .4,5,10,13,22A, 24 Doctor Office Visit Plan/ Health Reimbursement Arrangement ..... 13,22A,23, 24, 26 Emergency Counseling Plan Section l. .............. 10,12,17a,18,19 Section 2 .... ........... 10,l 7a,18,19,20,20a Retirement..................... 3 ,4,8,9, 1 0A, 12,l 7,20,20h,22A,23 Discipline Section 1 .................... 19b Section 2 .. ............. 19b,23 Section 3 .................... 19b,20e Section 4 .................... l 9b Section 5 ................... l 9b,20,23 Section 6 ................... l 9b,20 Section 7 ...................19b,20,23, 26 Section 8 ................... 19b,20 Section 9 ...................19b,20,23 Section I 0 ..................19b Section 1 l .................. l 9b Section 12...............23 Legal Counsel Section 1 .................... 5,7, 24 Section 2 ....................7,IOA,13, 24 Section 3 .................... 7 Section 4 ............... 24 Grievance Procedure Section l .................... l 9b,23 Section 2 .................... 19b,20 Section 3 ................... l 9b,22A Sections 4-7 .. .......... l 9b Section 8 ................ 23 Section 9 ................ 23 Section 10.............. 23 Section 11..............19b Section 12.............. 23 Sections 13-16 ......... 19b Section 17.............. 23 Administrative Leave Section 1 ................... .4, 10,I 0A Section 2 ....................9,20, 24 Section 3 ....................Sa,8 Section 4 ................... .4,8 Union Business ................. I 0, 24 
84 
Personnel Files................ 6 Clothing Maintenance .......... .4,6,8, l 0, 11,12,18, 24 Outside Employment 
Section 1 ................... .2,4 Section 2 .................... 5, 11 
Reduction in Force Section 1 .................... 8 Section 2 .................... 8, l 0A 
Member Treatment Section 1 ............... 18c Section 2 ............... l 8c 
Temporary Assignment. .......... 9,10A 
Specialized Positions and Training Sections 1-3............... .17, l 8a,20A, 26, 27 Section 4 ................23, 26, 27 Sections 5-8................17,l 8a,20A, 26, 27 Section 9 .................... 20A,20f, 26, 27 Section 10...................20A, 26, 27 Section l l ................... 20f Section 12...............23 
Transfers Section 1.. ................. 9,11,18,20 Section 2 ...................9 Section 3 ................... 9,18, 26, 27 
Badge, Retirement ID, Honorable Discharge Upon Retirement ... .10,12,19,22A, 24, 26 Car Utilization Study ......... 11,12 Health Care Cost Containment 
Committee ................... 15, 16, 18a Special Committee ­
Promotion System ............16,18a Side Letters .................. lOA,11,13 Physical Fitness Committee 
Sections 1-7...................17 Section 8 ......................23 
Family Care Leave Section 1-3................. l 9d Section 4 ................... 20f Section 5 .................. .20b 
Limited Duty................ 26 Section 1 ................26 Section 2 ......... ....... 26 
85 
Political Action Committee Deductions Sections 1-4............20c, 24 
Leave Donation Prograrn ..........23, 24, 25, 26 
Civilianization............24 
Tobacco Use..............24 
Health Care Shop Around ... 24 
Tenn ofAward and Agreement.. .. 23 

