AGREEMENT 
THIS Agreement, made and entered into this 1 day of January, 2017, by and between 
THE TOWNSHIP OF LEET, a municipal corporation organized and existing under the laws ofthe Commonwealth ofPennsylvania and located in the County ofAllegheny and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania aforesaid (hereinafter referred to as "Township"), 
AND The full time Police Officers of the Police Department of the Township of Leet (hereinafter referred to as "Police"), 
WITNESSETH 
WHEREAS, the Township and the Police have settled their differences through a collective bargaining process; and 
WHEREAS, the Township and Police agree that they are bound by the terms of the Act ofJune 24, 1968, P.L. 23 7, No. I 11 43 P.S. Section 217, et. Seq., (Act 11 I" hereinafter). 
ARTICLE I 
EFFECTIVE DATE 
This Agreement shall become effective as of January I, 2017 and shall continue in full force and effect through December 31 , 2021. 
ARTICLE II 
WORKDAY, WEEK AND SCHEDULE 
A. A "workday" shall consist oftwenty-four (24) consecutive hours beginning with the scheduled starting time ofthe first shift of6:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m., then the second shift of 2:00 p.m. to I 0:00 p.m., and then the third shift of I 0:00 p.m. to 6 a.m. 
B. A "scheduled workday" shall consist of eight (8) consecutive hours of work per shift. Each member ofthe Police force shall work the shifts and workdays assigned to him by the Chiefof Police, unless either ofthe following two conditions applies: 
I. The Chiefis entitled to change and adjust the shift starting times in the event ofemergency or in the event that he deems it necessary. 
2. The Township reserves the right to cut back on man-hours if it deems necessary due to insufficient funds. Furthermore, the Township reserves the right to reduce the number of officers in its employment if it deems necessary due to insufficient funds. 
C. A "Work Week" shall consist ofSunday through Saturday consecutively. Each Officer covered hereunder shall be guaranteed a minimum offorty (40) hours per week with exception for that situation provided for in Subsection B, (2) set forth above. 
D. A "Pay Period" shall consist oftwo work weeks. Each Officer shall be guaranteed a minimum ofeighty (80) hours per pay period with the exception for that situation provided for in Subsection B (2) set forth above. 
E. There shall be a minimum ofeight (8) hours offbetween shifts worked. 
ARTICLE Ill 
BASE PAY SCALE 2017 -2021 
RANK Lieutenant 5" Yr. Patrolman 4th Yr. Patrolman 3rd Yr. Patrolman 2nd Yr. Patrolman 1st Yr. Patrolman  2017 $31.25 $28.09 $25.28 $23.88 $22.47 $21.07  2018 $32.03 $28.79 $25.91 $24.47 $23.03 $21.59  2019 $32.83 $29.51 $26.56 $25.08 $23.60 $22.13  2020 $33.65 $30.25 $27.23 $25.71 $24.20 $22.69  2021 $34.49 $31.01 $27.91 $26.36 $24.81 $23.26  

The above captioned Pay Scales shall apply to Full Time Police Officers. Pay Rates are calculated at a 2.5% increase per year over the Five Year Period. 
New Hires shall be paid at the rate of ten dollars ($10.00) per hour while they are in training. 
Part-time Police Officers pay scales shall be calculated at eighty percent (80%) of the Base Pay Scale as that of a corresponding Full time Patrolman as pertains to their years of service. 
Examples: A first year Part-time Police Officer hired in 2019 shall, at the completion of his/ her training, be paid at the rate of $17.70 per hour. 
The rate of pay for a third year Part-time Officer in 2018 shall be $19.58. 
ARTICLE IV 
OVERTIME/COMP TIME 
All hours worked in excess of Forty (40) hours in a work week will be considered overtime for which member of this Police Force will be paid at an hourly rate of time and a half. Said overtime can be taken in the form of comp time, in lieu of overtime pay, if so desired by the Officer and approved and scheduled by the Chiefof Police. 
All hours worked within the prescribed eight hours of time off between shifts shall be considered overtime hours. 
Court time or other "special duty pay" as outlined in Article VII shall not be used to calculate overtime. 
Furthermore, there will be no stacking ofpremium pay and no stacking ofovertime onto Holiday pay. 
ARTICLE V 
LONGEVITY PAY 
Longevity Pay shall be paid at the rate of Five Dollars ($5.00) per month for each month of service for the length ofthe contract. 
This is to be paid, in annual installments on December I of each year hereafter until otherwise contractually modified. 
The above stated provision for longevity pay will apply only to those currently employed on a full time basis and eligible. No such provision will be given to those new hires taken on by the Police Department after December 1, 2012. 
ARTICLE YI 
PENSION 
In addition to the pension provided to each full time Police Officer, the Township shall provide each officer the opportunity to participate in a 457 Deferred Compensation Plan Account. The maximum amount to be contributed to the Township toward the Officer's 457 Deferred Compensation Plan Account for each Police Officer shall be Twenty-Five (25.00) dollars per month. However, this does not mean the Township will make unilateral contributions per month. Said contributions will only be made in combination with each police officers contribution. The Township shall amend the terms ofthe pension to include/provide the 
D.R.O.P. Plan and the 20 Year and Out Plan. 
ARTICLE VII 
HEARING AND COURT TIME 
MAGISTRATE COURT: When an officer is on duty, he or she receives no additional compensation for attending a Magistrate's hearing. When the officer is not on duty, he or she will receive two and one-half(2 /12) hours ofstraight time. 
COMt-ION PLEAS' COURT: When an officer is on duty during the daylight shift and is required to appear in Common Pleas Court, he shall receive no additional compensation, unless such court time exceeds the two o'clock quitting time, in which case he shall be compensated at time and one-half of his regular pay for any hours spent in court. Lunch and parking expenses will be reimbursed. In the event an officer is not on duty and is required to appear in Common Pleas Court, the officer will receive a minimum of four (4) hours at time and one-half (6 hours), longer if required, plus reimbursement for lunch and parking expenses. Receipts must be presented to the Township Manager in order to receive reimbursement. 
Transporting a prisoner, taking evidence to the crime lab, or attending any mandated detail; an officer shall be paid at the rate oftime-and-one half, for a minimum of four (4) hours. 
Any time an officer is called out during his/her normally scheduled time off for transporting a prisoner to Allegheny County Jail or anywhere outside ofour jurisdiction, with the exception ofCoraopolis, two (2) officers shall be utilized. Officers shall be paid at a minimum rate of4 hours at time and one half, longer if required when participating in any training/detail mandated by the Department. 
ARTICLE VIII 
VACATION AND VACATION PAY 
The following scale ofvacation time offwith pay to the Lieutenant is as follows: 
Over 25 years ofservice............................. 25 days 
Qualification for vacation time shall begin from the first day ofservice. Vacation time off shall be cleared with the Lieutenant at least one week before vacation shall begin. Vacation time may not be carried from one year to the next. An officer may not work during his vacation except in the event of an emergency declared by the Chief of Police. At that time, the officer will earn regular hourly pay plus his vacation hourly pay, or he may withdraw vacation and take it at a later date. 
For those full time police officers hired by the Township of Leet after November 18, 2007 the following scale ofpaid vacation applies: 
a.  Zero to One year service .............................................................. 0 days  
b.  One to Five years service ........................................................... IO days  
c.  Over Five years service .............................................................. 15 days  

ARTICLE IX 
HOLIDAYS AND HOLIDAY PAY 
The following holidays are recognized as such by the Township and the Police. 
New Year's Eve 
New Year's Day Labor Day 
Easter Thanksgiving Day 
Memorial Day Christmas Eve 
Independence Day Christmas Day 
During the above nine (9) holidays, for each hour an officer works, he shall receive double time and one-half. If the officer is off, he shall receive straight pay. 
PERSONAL DAYS 
Each officer is also entitled to five (5) days off for personal reasons per year. These days may be taken at anytime during the year with the approval of the Chief of Police, provided that it shall not be granted ifit would require the Township to pay overtime to any person to cover the shift. 
ARTICLE X 
LIFE INSURANCE 
The Township will provide each member ofthe Police Force with group term life insurance in the amount of Fifty Thousand ($50,000) for coverage in the event ofthe officer's death. 
ARTICLE XI 
MEDICAL INSURANCE 
During the term of this Agreement, the Township will provide the members of the Police Force with twenty-four (24) hour group hospitalization and medical insurance coverage. 
Through the term of this agreement, officers will be responsible for paying 5% of the monthly premium associated with their individual coverage option, which will be paid via payroll deduction. This coverage shall be for the same number of individuals and dependents that are presently covered at the execution of this agreement. In the event that additional officers are hired or if present officers wish to increase their coverage to include additional members of their families, that increased cost over the original premium less the 5% officer contribution, will be the financial responsibility ofthe officer. 
Furthermore, ifthe Township is able to secure a comparable insurance package from another provider, then the Township shall be authorized to do so without an amendment to this contract or a memorandum of understanding. In the event that the cost ofthe new coverage is lower, the Township's contribution to annual health care coverage premiums will be reduced to the new lower rate with each member ofthe police force paying 5% ofthe new amount. 
ARTICLE XII 
A. SHORT TERM DISABILITY 
During the term ofthis Agreement, the Township will provide the Police with weekly disability income coverage beginning with the first day of accident and the eighth day of sickness in an amount equal to Sixty Percent (60%) ofthat Officer's pay at that time for Twenty-Six (26) weeks. 
8. LONG TERM DISABILITY 
During the term of this Agreement, the Township will provide the Police with monthly long term disability coverage in the amount equal to Fifty Percent (50%) of that Officer's pay at that time for the maximum benefit period stipulated by the applicable policy retained by the Township. 
ARTICLE XIII 
SICK LEAVE 
An officer who misses work due to sickness or injury shall call the Lieutenant at least four hours prior to his shift he is scheduled to work. The Chief of Police shall notify another officer in the event of a call off due to sickness or injury. An officer shall work no double shift unless it is an emergency and they are notified or called by the ChiefofPolice. 
The Township shall provide full pay to a sick or injured officer for thirty (30) days in every calendar year. The Township shall be excused from payment if the officer is being paid by Workmen's Compensation, or any other type of insurance or compensation, as per 53 P.S., Section 637. A written doctor's excuse must be submitted to the Chief of Police and Public Safety Chairman in the event that the sick leave will extend over five (5) days. If an excuse is not presented, all pay benefits will stop. Periodic written medical reports, if necessary, must be submitted every six (6) months, upon request of the Board ofTownship Commissioners. 
ARTICLE XIV 
BEREAVEMENT OR EMERGENCY LEA VE 
Three (3) days leave will be granted to a member of the Police Force in the event of a death in the immediate family or any other emergency beyond the officer's control. All benefits will be expended for a length of three (3) days. After three (3) days, pay will discontinue, but benefits will continue for a length of one (I) month. "Immediate Family" shall be defined as: spouse, children, parent, grandparent, grandchildren, brother, sister, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law and sister-in-law. 
ARTICLE XV 
EQUIPMENT 
Every officer at the time of employment shall be furnished with equipment issued by the Township as prescribed by the Chiefof Police to cover a uniform dress code. 
ARTICLE XVI 
CLOTHING ALLOWANCE 
Every new officer shall receive three (3) complete uniforms to be used in the performance of his duties. The type (winter or summer) shall be determined by the season that the officer is hired. 
For the entire Contract period, each full time officer will be entitled to annual clothing allowance in the amount of Seven Hundred Fifty ($750.00) Dollars. Bills must be submitted to the Township to be paid. One Hundred Fifty ($150.00) Dollars ofthis amount can be carried over for one year if not used by an officer. Clothing damage in the line of duty will be replaced at the expense ofLeet Township. 
ARTICLE XVII 
COMP TIME 
Each Officer shall have the option ofdeferring his overtime, court-time, and holiday time pay to comp-time off. Comp Time offshall be approved by either the ChiefofPolice or his designee and shall not be permitted ifovertime is necessary to accommodate comp-time off. 
PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION 
All officers will be required to attend and successfully complete a course each year in the use and qualifications of the service weapon. The Township shall cover all costs of ammunition and hours ofpay as attended by the officer to qualify with his service weapon. 
In the event of a required course that an officer must attend, the Township shall provide him with full pay during the time of instruction, paid lunch and all necessary supplies needed for that school. He shall also be excused from his regular work day. 
Qualifying schools are limited to those that an officer can drive less than I00 miles from the Township boundary lines. The officer shall receive prior approval from the Chief of Police for any other schools outside ofthat area. 
ARTICLE XIII 
GENERAL PROCEDURES 
Grievances are limited to matters involving interpretation ofthis agreement, and also to include all matters ofdiscipline. 
Step I. The member, either alone or accompanied by a representative of the bargaining unit, or the bargaining unit itself, shall present the grievance in writing to the Chief of Police within thirty (30) days of its occurrence or knowledge of its occurrence. The Chief shall report his decision in writing to the member and the bargaining unit representative within seven (7) days ofits presentation. 
Step 2. In the event that the grievance is not settled at Step I, an appeal must be presented in writing by the member or the bargaining unit representative to the head ofthe political subdivision within seven (7) days after the response at Step I is due. The head ofthe political subdivision or his designated representative shall respond in writing to the member and the bargaining unit representative within seven (7) days after the receipt ofthe appeal. 
Step 3. In the event that the grievance has not been satisfactorily resolved in Step 2, the bargaining unit representative may initiate an appeal by servicing upon the head of the political subdivision 
8 
a notice in writing of his intent to proceed to arbitration within seven (7) days after the receipt ofthe Step 2 decision. 
The Arbitrator is to be selected by the parties jointly within seven (7) days after the notice has been given. Ifthe parties fail to agree upon an arbitrator, either party may request the American Arbitration Association to submit a list ofthree (3) possible arbitrators. The parties shall meet within seven (7) days of the receipt ofthe said I ist for the purpose ofselecting the Arbitrator by alternately striking one name from the list until only one name remains. The Township strikes the first name. The Arbitrator shall neither add to, subtract from, nor modify the provisions ofthis agreement, or ofany other submitted for arbitration. He has no authority to determine any other issues not submitted to him. His decision shall be final and binding on both parties, and he shall be required to submit his decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing. All of the time limits contained in this article may be extended by mutual agreement. All fees and expenses of the Arbitrator shall be divided equally between the parties. Each party shall bear the cost of preparing and presenting its own case. 
An aggrieved member and bargaining unit representative and a reasonable number of witnesses shall be granted reasonable time during working hours to process grievances in accordance with this decision without loss ofpay. 
ARTICLE XIX 
ADOPTION OF POLICE CONTRACT 
All previous guaranteed items between the Township and Police shall also carry over to this agreement ifthey are not listed in the Agreement as a change. 
ARTICLE XX 
MERGER, CONSOLIDATION OR DISSOLUTION OF POLICE SERVICES 
That nothing in the within Agreement shall be interpreted or construed to prevent or limit the 
Township in merging, consolidation or dissolving the Leet Township Police Department during the term of 
this Agreement. 
ARTICLE XXI EFFECTIVE DATE 
This Agreement shall become effective as ofJanuary I, 2017 and shall continue in full force and effect through December 31, 2021. 
THIS AGREEMENT IS THE ENTIRE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PARTIES AGREED TO ON THlS IST DAY OF JANUARY, 2017. 
LEET TOWNSHIP POLICE TOWNSHIP OF LEET 
ls/Robert Simmons ls/Gary L. Brade! Gary L. Brade!, President ls/Michael Molinaro ls/Ronald Wilson IslAngel Moore ATTEST: ls/Betsy Rengers 

