
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING 
AGREEMENT 

BETWEEN CITY OF BOSTON 


AND 
BOSTON POLICE PATROLMEN'S ASSOCIATION, INC. JULY 1, 2007 -JUNE 30, 2010 


i 
i 
I 
! 


TABLE OF CONTENTS Article Paae Number 
I Per-sonsCoveredBylhisAgreement .. 2 II Non-Discrimination. . 3 III Payroll Deduction ofAssociation Dues 3 
Section 2 Agency Service Fee 3 
IV Employee Rights and Representation 4 Section 6A Stability ofAnociation Representation 6 V Management Rights 7 VA. Discipline and Discharge . 7 VI Grievance Procedure and Arbitration . 7 VII No-Strike Clause 10 VUI Stability ofAgreement . . . 11 IX Hours ofWork and Overtime . . 11 Sectlo11 1 Scheduled Tours ofDuty or Work Shifts 11 Section JA Day Offor Squad Schedules and Lunch Hours 13 Section JB. Shift Selection Based on Seniority .14 Section 2 Schedulingo/Ove1time 18 Section l Oveltime Service 18 Section 4 Method ofCompensation/or Overtime Service 22 X Court Time 24 XI Holidays 25 XII Paying Police Details. . 26 XIII Fitness To Return To Work After Service 
Connected Sickness, Injury, Or Disability 31 XIIIA. Redemption Of Sick Leave 33 Section 1 Annual Redemption .. . 33 XIV Labor·-Management Committee 34 xv Other Leaves OfAbsence 36 Section 2 Military Leave . .37 Section 3 Death in Immediate Family .37 Section 4 Pregnancy-Maternity I eave 37 
XVI Miscellaneous... .38 Section 1 Association Bulletin Boards 38 Section 2. Orders . .38 Section 3 Seveiability .38 Section 4 Benefit~ 38 Section 6 Health and Safety 39 Section 7 Health Inswance . 39 Section 7A Accidental Death Insurance . 41 

! 
I 

Section 9. Access to Pe1 ,onnel Files . 
..42 

Section 11. Personal Leai·e Benefit 
.. 43 

Section 12 Pl!)'S'icians Ce11ijicate. 
'.44 

Section 13 Reimbul'Sement ofLegal Fees .. .45 Secti'o11 14 Horpital Liairon Notification .. 
'.45 

Section JS. Vacation Starting Time .45 Section 16. Legislative Agent .. 46 Section 17 Physical Standards '' .46 Section 18. Vacations , .. .47 S'ecti'on 20. Bullet Prnof Vests· ._.. . , . ..48 Section 21. Career Evaluation, Development and 
TlackingSystem. 48 Section 22. Subl'lance Abuse , .49 Section 23. Re.sidency ,51 Section 24 Admini:s"trative F1111ctiom 51 XVII Compensation . .. 52 Section I Salary Schedule . .52 Section 2 Hazardom Duty Compensation ... 53 Section 3. A.ssignmenl Differential .54 
Section 3A, Field Trnining O./]icei . .55 _Section 4 Detectives . : . . 55 Section 5. Uniform and Clothing Allowance .. 56 Section 6 Night Shift Differential .... 56 Section 7 Annual Honorarium ,57 .Section 8. Weekend Differential. , . . . 57 Section 9 9Il Response Specialist 57 XVUA.. Education Incentive Plan/Longevity Program 58 Section I. Educational Incentive Plan. . 58 Section 2 Longevity Progtam . . .60 
XIII. Duration ofAgreement. 61 Salary Charts. 62 
Disclaimer: THIS DOCUMENT JS PREPARED BY THE BPPA FOR THE CONVENIENCE OF ITS MEMBERS IT IS NOT INTENDED TO ESTABLISH ANY LEGAL RIGHTS 
THIS AGREE)v1ENI is entered into b:> the Ci~ of Boston, (hereinafter ihe "Cit};'' or "the Municipal Emplo) er'') acting by and through its Ma) or, and the Boston Police Patrolmen 's Association, Incorporated, (hereinafter "Association," or "the Union,") pursuant to the pro,isions ofChapter 1078 of the Acts of 1973, as amended (General 1 aws Chapter I SOE), and in accordance" ith the results of collective bargaining between the Cit; and the Association, reflected by the provisions of the collective bargaining agreement between the Cit} and the Association effective July I, 1979, as amended by the Memorandum of Agreement effective July I, 1981; by the Memorandum of Agreement effective Jul) l, 1982; by the Memorandum of Agreement effective July 1, 1984; b} the Memorandum of Agreement effective July l, 1987; bl the Anderson Interest Arbitration Avvard issued June 3, 1994; and b\­the Memorandum of Agreement effective July I, 1996; by th~ Memomndum of Agreement effective July I, 1998; and by the 
Memorandum of Agreement effective Jul) I, 2001; by the Interest Arbitration Av,ard issued July 22, 2004 
WIINESSEUI 
WHEREAS the above-cited statutory provisions grant to employees of political subdivisions of the Commonwealth the right to bargain collectively with their Municipal Employer; and 
WHEREAS the parties to this Agreement desire to establish a state ofamicable understanding, cooperation and hannony; and 
WHEREAS parties to this Agreement consider themselves mutually responsible to improve the public service through the creation of increased morale and efficiency; 
WHEREAS the parties intend and hereby do carry forward and prese1ve tho terms and conditions contained in the agreement dated July 1, 1979, as modified and amended thereafter, in a single consolidated document without adding to, subtracting from, or changing such agreements in any way; 
NOW THEREFORE; it1 consideration of the mutual promises and agreements herein contained, the parties mutually agree as follows: 
j f 
i 

ARTICLE I PERSO'.\S COVERED BY THIS AGREEMENT 
The Cit) recognizes the Association as the exclusi\e representati\ e, for the purpose ofcollecti\e bargaining rdati\ e to wages, hours, and other conditions of emp!o) ment, of all patrolmen, including police\\omen in the seri."ice of the Cit\ The City and the Association recognize that once stude;t officers begin performing field training exercises or regular police duties, including but not limited to, sh1dent officers authorized to perform said duties under an exemption b) the Criminal Justice Training Council, said officers shall cease to be student officers within the meaning of M G.1 c 41, § 96B and shall be con~idcrcd probationary police officers within the meaning ofMG.L. c 31, §61. In accordance with§ 61, the 
probatiomuy period of said officers shall commence on the first day that he or she begins performing any of the duties of a police officer and shall tcrn1inatc twelve months after said date, at which point the officer shall become a pcnnancnt police officer. Any training during the twelve-month period shall be considered in-service training and shall not toll the running of the twelve-month probationary period under § 61 Said probationary police officers shall be entitled to all the benefits set forth in this collective bargaining agreement, notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary 
Nothing herein shall prevent the Police Commissioner from using student officers to perform police functions in the event of an unforeseen emergency fn the event that students rue utilized in an emergency situation to perform police duties other than those scheduled as pmt of their Academy training, they will be covered by tbe terms of the collective bargaining agreement during the performance of said functions in the emergency situation. The use of students in such emergencies, without more, will not trigger the start of an officer's probationary period Student officcts shall not be employed to circumvent the overtime provisions of the collective bargaining agreement 
2 
AR!ICLE II 
NON-DISCRIMISAIION 

The Cit\ and the Association agree not to discriminate in an) wa, ag_~inst emplo) ees co, ered by this Agreement on account of·rac~e, religion, creed, color, national origin, sex, age or membership or non-membership in the Association 
ARTICLE Ill 

PAYROLLDEDUCIION OF ASSOCIAI!ON DUES 
Section 1. . In accordance with the provisions of Section l 7 A, Chapter 180 ofthe General Lm,s (Chapter 740 oftheActs of 1950), accepted 
b) the Cit) Council of the City of Boston on January 15, ~9?1, and approved by its Ma) or on Janua0 17, 1951, Associat10n dues shall be deducted by the City weekly from the salary of each emplo)-ee who executes and remits to the City a form of authorization for pa1roll dedoction ofAssociation dues 
Section 2 .. PayroJI deduction of agency service fee 
(a) Pursuant to Chapter 335 of the Acts of 1969, to· assure that employees covered by this Agreement shall be adequ~tely represented by the Association in bargaining co!l~ctively. on questions of wages, hours, and other cond1t1ons of employment, the Collector-Treasurer of the City shall deduct from each payment of salary made to each such employee during the life of this collective bargaining agreement and pay over to the Association, the exclusive bargaining agent for such employee, as an agency service fee, the a suin, whi_d1 amount is proportionately commensurate with the cost of collective bargaining and contract administration The Association certifies that this collective bargaining agreement is for!nally executed pursuant to a vote of a maj01ity of all employees in 
the bargaining unit 
(b) The Association agrees to indemnii)' the City fa~ ~ama~es which the City may be required to pay by an admm1strnt1vc 
3 
I
, 

agenc: or court ofcompetent jurisdiction oflast resort as a result of the Cit;. 's compliance \\ith paragraph (a) of this section, pro\'ided that ar1) such sum of damages is limited to the amount deducted from and pa) able to the particular suitors ( claimants) \\ho are named part) or parties plaintiff but ·to no other persons 
ARIICLE IV EMPLOYEE RIGHISAJ\1) REPRESENIAIION 
Section 1. Emplo)ees ha\e, and shall be protected in the exercise of the right, freely and without fear of penalty or reprisal, to join and assist the Association The freedom of employees to assist the Association shall be recognized as extending to participation in the management of the Association and acting for the Association in the capacity of an Association officer or representative, or otherwise, and including the right to present Association views and positions to the public, to officials of the City and the Department, to members of the City Council of the City of Boston and of the GcnerJ.l Court, orto any other appropriate authority or official 
Without limiting the foregoing, the City agrees that it will not aid, promote, 01 finance any labor group or organization purporting to engage in collective bargaining or make any agreement with any such group or organization which would violate any rights of the Association under this Agreement or the law. Further, no representative, Department official, 01 ageflt of the Cit)'.shall: 
Interfere with, restrain, m coerce employees in the exercise 
of their right to join or refrain from joining the Association 
2 Interfere with the fo1 mation, existence, operations, or administration of the Association 
3 Discriminate in regard to employment or conditions of employment in order to encourage 01 discourage membership in the Association 
4 

4 Discriminate against ai1 emplo}ee because he has gi\en testimony or taken part in an} grie\ ance procedures, or other hearings, negotiations or conferences for of in behalf of the Association; or 
5, Refuse to meet, negotiate, or confer on proper matters with officers or representatives of the Association as set forth in this Agreement 
Section 2. I he members of the Association Bargaining Committee, not to exceed five (5), shall be granted leave of absenCe without loss of pay or benefits for all meetings between the City and the Association for the purpose of negotiating the terms of a contract or supplements thereto Association officers, shift representatives, and Bargaining Committee members, not to exceed five (5) in any instance, shall be granted leave of 
absence without loss of pay or benefits for time required to discuss and process grievances or incidents which could lead to grievances, with the employee or others involved, and to attend all '1standing committee" meetings with the City as provided in Article XIV, and may enter any premises of the Department at any reasonable time for such purposes provided they give notice of their presence immediately upon arrival to the person in charge. Such officers, shift representatives, and Bargaining Committee members who work with any night platoon shall have their hours and schedule of work accordingly adjusted to effectuate the purposes ofthis section 
Section 3., Association officers and shift representatives shall be permitted to discuss official Association business with employees prior to on-duty roll call or following off-duty roll call 
Section 4. The Association shall p1ovide the Department and keep updated a list ofits officers and Bargaining Committee members, and of 
all of its shift representatives 
5 

Section 5 .. Association officers, shift representatives, and Bargaining Committee members, up to a maximum total offi.te (5) in any one instance, shall be granted lea\ e of absence,\\ ithout pay but \\ ith no loss of benefits, if they so request to attend meetings of the City Council of the City of Boston, the General Court or other public bod) 
Section 6. Association officers, representatives, and committee members shall not be transfeITed out of their unit, district, division or 
·bureau, nor be reassigned nor detailed permanently from one platoon to another except upon their own request or in normal 42-day rotation of night men 
Section 6A. Stability of Association Representatives Notwithstanding any contrary provision ofthis Agreement, and in addition to the restrictions contained in Section 6, association officers and shift representatives who, during the life of this Agreement, become ex-officers or ex-•shift representative shall not be involuntarily transferred for one (I) year after leaving office except for malfoasancc or misconduct as charged by the Police Commissioner 
Section 7.. The City agrees to recognize shift representatives of the Association of not more than one for each shift at each unit, dist1ict, division Ol bureau, except as follows: 
'.fraffic Division: two {2) on days; one(!) on nights Tactical Patrol force; three (3) Headquarters: three {3) 

Section 8 .. 
Shift Representatives to the House of District Representatives shall be excused from reporting for and performing their tours ofduty to attend all regular; and not more than three (3) special meetings per year of the House of District Representatives and the Executive Board of the Association without loss of pay or benefits 
6 
ARIICLEV 


MANAGEI\IENT RIGHTS 

Subject to this Agreement and applicable law, the Cit) (and its Ma) ot and Police Commissioner) resenes and retains the regular and customary rights and prerogatl\es of municipal management 
ARTICLE VA DISCIPlINE AND DISCHARGE 

Section 1 
No bargaining unit member who has completed his one-) ear probationar} period shall be disciplined or discharged without just cause. The filing with the Civil Service Commission of a disciplinaiy or discharge appeal shall constitute an election of Civil Service as the exclusive procedure for resolving the dispute and the disciplinary matter shall not be the subject of grievance and arbitration 
ARIICLEVl GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE AND ARBIIRAIION 

Section L Definition 
1he term "gdevance" shall mean any dispute concerning the interpretation, application, 01 enforcement of this Agreement 

Section 2 .. 
Grievances shall be processed as follows; 
Step l lhe employee and/m the Association, with or without the presence of the aggrieved employee, shall present the grievance orally to the employee's immediate superior outside of the bargaining unit or lo the officer in charge, if other than such superioi; who shall attempt to adjust the gtievance informally This fast step may be omitted by mutual agreement. 
7 


Step 2. If the grie\ a nee is not resoh ed at Step I wirh in fort: ­eight ( 48) hours, it shall be presented orall) to the com man ding officer of the employee's unit, district, di\ ision, or bureau,\\ ho shall attempt to adjust the grie, ance infom1all) 
Step 3, If the grievance is not resolved at Step 2 within five (5) calendar da) s, the grie\ ance shall be submitted in writing to the Police Commissioner A meeting bet\,een the Commissioner and/or his designated representati, e{s) and the Grie, ance Committee of the Association, composed of not more than five (5) persons, shall be held within fi,e {S) calendar days after referral to the Commissioner If the grievance is not satisfactoril) adjusted at this meeting, the Commissioner shall give his written explanator:i ans,, er \', ithin three (3) calendar da) s of the meoeting 
Any giievance of a general nature affecting a large group of employees may at the option of the Association be filed at Step 3 of the grievance procedure 
Step 4 If the grievance is not resolved at Step 3 at the meeting held within five (5) calendar days after submission to the Commissioner, then, upon receipt of the written explanatory answer ofihe Commissioner; the grievance shall be submitted in writing to the City's Grievance Committee which may consist of (without limitation) the following officials: the Supervisor of Personnel, the Mayor's Labor Relations Representative, and/or a representative of the Corporation Counsel A meeting between the City's Grievance Committee and the Association's Grievance Committee as aforesaid shall be held within five (5) calendar days after reforrnl to the City's Grievance Committee. If the grievance is not satisfactorily adjusted at this meeting, the City's Grievance Committee shall give its answer or reasons witbin five (5) calcndm days of the meeting 
Step 5. If the grievance is not resolved at Step 4 at the meeting held within five (5) calendar days after submission to the City's Grievance Committee, then, upon receipt of the City's Grievance Committee answer or reasons, the Association, and 
8 

onl) the Association, ma:, in any instance, submit the grie\ar1ce to expedited arbiuation Such submission must be made\\ ithin the said thirt) (30) calendar da) s, after the expiration of the five (5) calendar days provided for the City's Grievance Committc:e a11s\> er or reasons as referred to herein Within the said thirt:) (30) calendar da) s \Hitten notice ofsaid submission shall be gi\en to the City by deliver) in hand or b) mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the attention of its Corporation Counsel. The arbitrator shall be selected in a manner mutuall) agreed upon b) the parties from a rotating panel of not less than three (3) and not more than five (5) arbitrators selected 
b} mutual agreement of the parties. The arbitrator shall hear the giie\ancc ,vithin one (1) week from the date submitted to him or her and shall issue a dccisio~ within five (5) working days after the close of the hearing Neither party shall file post­hearing briefs 
Section 3. Written submissions of grievances at Step 3 and Step 4 shall be in not less than triplicate, on forms to be agreed upon jointly, and shall be signed by the representative of the Association filing the grievances Ifa grievance is adjusted at Step 3 or Step 4 of the grievance procedure, the adjustment shall be noted on the grievance form and shall be signed by the respective City represcntative(s), as the case may be, and the Association representatives reaching the adjustment. Ifthe City exceeds any time limit prescribed at any step in the grievance procedure, the aggrieved employee and/Ol the Association may invoke the next step of the procedure The Association sha!l have the right to have a representative present at any grievance hearing and shall be given adequate notice of all grievance hearings 

Section 4 
Grievances shall be filed at Step I within thirty (30) calcndai days after knowledge or reason to know of the occuuence or failure of occurrence of the incident upon which the grievance is based Grievances not appealed to any next step within fifteen ( 15) calendar days after presentation at each step, or to arbitration within forty (40) calendar daJ,s after presentation 
-----________ ..:........:,..:: .· 


at Step 4, shall be deemed settled. All time limits may be shortened or extended by mutual agreement 
Section 5.. The decision ofthe arbitrator shall be final and binding upon the parties, except that the arbitrator shall make no decision which alters, amends, adds to or detracts from this Agreement, or which recommends a right or relief for any period of time prior to the effoctive date of this Agreement, or which modifies or abridges the rights and prerogatives of municipal management under Article V of this Agreement. 
ARIJCLEVII NO-SIRJKE CLAUSE 

Section 1. No employee covered b) this Ag1eement shall engage in, induce or encourage any strike, work stoppage, slowdown, or withholding of services The Association agrees that neither it nor any of its officers or agents will call, institute, authorize, participate in, sanction or ratify any such strike, work stoppage, slowdown, or withholding of services 

Section 2 .. 
Should any employee or group of employees covered by this Agreement engage in any strike, work stoppage, slowdown, or withholding ofservices, the Association shall forthwith disavow any such strike, work stoppage, slowdown, or withholding of services and shall refuse to recognize any picket line established in connection therewith. Furthermore, at the request ofthe City, the Association shall take all reasonable means to induce such employee or group of employees to terminate the strike, work stoppage, slowdown, or withholding of services and to return to work forthwith 

Section 3 .. 
In consideration of the performance by the Association of its obligations under Sections I and 2 of this Article, there 
10 

shall be no liability on the part of the Association nor of i,s officers or agents for any monetary damages resulting from the 
·unauthorized breach ofthe agreements contained in thisArticle by individual members ofiheAssociation Any employee \,ho breaches · the agreements contained in this Article shall be subject to disciplinary proceedings under Civil Seri,ice law and rules. 


ARIJCLE VIII SIABILIIY OF AGREEMENI 

Section l. No amendment, alteration or variation ofthe terms or provisions ofthis Agreement shall bind the parties hereto unless made and executed in \Hiting by the parties hereto. 
Section 2. The failure of the City or the Association to insist, in any one or more situations, upon performance of any of the terms or provisions ofthis Agreement shall not be considered as a waiver 01 relinquishment of the right ofthe City or of the Association to future performance of any such term or provision, and the obligations of the Association and the City to such future performance shall continue in full force and effect. 
ARIICLEIX HOURS OF WORK AND OVERIIME 

Section l.. Scheduled foms of Duty 01 Work Shifts 
Except for those officers assigned to the drug control unit including dmg control officers detailed to the districts, employees shall be scheduled to work on regular work shifts or tours ofduty and each work shift or tour ofduty shall have a regular starling time and quitting time Work schedules shall be posted on all Department bulletin boards at all times and copies shall be given to the Association. 
11 


The Department shal! gh e se\ en~ -t\\ o (72) hours notice prior to changing the shift ofa squad(s) of those officers assigned to the drug control unit including drug control officers detailed to the districts. The Department ma) change the shifts of such officers no more than five tours per calendar month. The Department shall not alter the shifts ofsuch officers in order to avoid the court time provisions of this agreement Such officers shall receh e t\\ o hours of pa) at the O\ ertime rate for each such shift that the officer \\Orks outside his/her regular shift. Moreover, \\here the Department alters the shift of a squad of such officers under this section, the Department agrees to make an eight hour overtime shift available to one officer in that area pursuant to the "low man" approach and practice (not a drug control officer) On or after Tuly I, 1988, the Department may implement the following tours of duty and hours of\\ork to be staffed according to the scni01 it} clause of the Agreement 
(a) 11:45 PM. to 7:30AM (b) 12:45AM to8:30AM (c) 7:30AM to 4:00 PM (d) 8:30AM. to 5:00 PM. (e)4-00PM.to 11:45PM 
(f) 5:00 PM. to 12:45 AM (g) 5:30 PM to 1:00AM 

CANINE UNIT 
Day Shift or Tom 
6:00 AM to 12 noon 
12:00 noon to 6:00 PM 
Night Shift or I our 
6:00 P.M to 12 midnight 12 midnight to 6:00 AM. 

If the Department implements the aforementioned shifts, all existing shifts, at the time of implementation, arc eliminated and the new shifts shall be staffed by strict seniority. The existing "Four and Two Wmk Schedule" shall remain in ·full force and effect 
12 

Except for the potential changes of shifts ofofficers assigned to the drug control unit including drug control officers detailed to the districts, and those officers in the Major Case Unit assigned to drug related cases, the City agrees to bargain col!ectiwl} with the Association concerning any proposed change in an) tour of duty or shift specified or referred to by this section. In equal right, the Association agrees to bargain collecth el) with the Cit) concerning an) proposed change in an) tour ofduty or shift specified or referred to by this section 
Upon receiving awritten request signed by the aftect~d officer( s ), that officer's commanding ofticyr may allow the swapping of a tour(s) of duty as described herein An officer may be allowed to swap tours ofdut} outside ofhis/h,er regularly assigned°shift ( da) tour for night tour, etc) and may be allowed to work out of tum for himself/herself; providing that the out of turn tour is worked prior to the regularly scheduled tour of duty beirig taken off An officc1 that has swapped his/her tour shall be paid at the rate ofpay of his/henegu\arly assigned tour of duty. The commanding officer's discretion is paramount in these cases and his/her decisions regarding any issue in this paragraph is not subject to the grievance procedure of this agreement 
Section l(a) .. Day-Oft m·Squad Schedules and Lunch Hours 
(i) 
All current day-off or· squad schedules in force and effect for employees as ofMarch 3, 1971, as established under Special Order dated September 10, 1970 (4 and2 work schedule), shall continue in force and effect during the term ofthis Agreement, provided, that day~off or squad schedules may be changed from time to time by mutual agreement between the Police Commissioner and the Association 

(ii) 
All day shifts or tours shall include a half-hour paid lunch period for all bargaining unit employees Dming their paid lunch period, officers will remain on call in accordance with the existing "Code 10" directive dated September 18, 1979 


Compensation for each half-hour lunch period shall be calculated at a straight time rate [(regular\\ eek!) compensation di\-ided by 40) x. .5] except \\ hen a lunch period occurs during an O\.ertime shift or tour in \\hich case the O\ertime rate \\ill appl) 
Such compensation shall be included in the emplo) ee's regular ,,,.eek!) pay for the purposes of computing sick pay, injured pay, holida: pay, and Yacation pay and shall be considered regular compensation for pension and retirement purposes to the extent permitted b) law 
Section I (b) .. Shift Selection Based Upon Seniority 
Subsection 1 Commencing on Ju!y I, 1988, the Department and the Union agree that ail police officers who have completed their probationary period shall be assigned to all permanent shift vacancies on the basis of strict seniority, as these terms are defined below The Police Commissioner rese1 ves the right to determine the personnel requirement to be assigned to any particular shift and nothing in this A1ticle shall be construed to limit the Commissioner's authority to determine numerical requirements within a district or bureau 
Subsection 2 A "shift vacancy" is defined as a personnel 
requirement that the Department intends to fill Such 
vacancies may be created by, but are not limited to, 
the rcmov,al from service of a police officer due to the 
resignation, retirement, or death of a police officer, the 
permanent promotion of a police officer to another 
bargaining unit, o_r the permanent assignment of a police 
officer to another statiOfl,'-J)rOVldfrii--th"e ·ncpartincnt 
i~tCildS--fo--fftr ·t1iC VaCancy This section shall not be 
interpreted to limit the Commissioner's ability to 
determine tbe numerical personnel requirement of any 
shift Not included wilbin the definition of permanent 
vacancy is a vacancy caused by the assignment of a 
14 

police officer to the l\-1edically Incapacitated Section, by the designation of the police officer as sick or "injured on," by the provisional promotion of a police officer to a higher rank, or similar temporar:, absences, or b) the designation/assigrunent of police officers in the position of community service officer (CSO) and/or youth service officer (YSO) v,here the Department has a special need to so designate such officer(s). As a result, officers so designated/assigned shall not be subject to the posting and bidding requirements of this Section -----.__ 
"Police Officer" as used herein does not include officers serving their probational) periqd 
Subsection 3. Seniorit) as desCribed in this Article shall apply on!J to shift selection v,ithin a station and shall not apply to assignments between stations, units, districts, 
divisions or bureaus 
Subsection 4.. Police Officers assigned to the Medically Incapacitated Section shall not exercise seniority rights pursuant to this Article 
Subsection 5.. For purpose of this Article only, seniority shall be defined as the employee's length of service in the Department, as dete1mined by the date of their permanent appointment as a police officer. If two or more erhployees possess the same date of permanent appointment, seniority shall be determined by the date of first employment with the Department. If two or more employees possess the same date of first employment with the Department, seniority shall be determined by date of first continuous and uninterrupted employment by the City of Boston If two or more employees shall possess the same date of continuous and uninterrupted employment by the City of Boston, senimity shall be determined by the date of application for the position of police ofiiccr with the Personnel Administrator for the Commonwealth 
15 
' 
I ime dernted to authorized militaf) or matemit) lea\ e of absence from the Department shall be included in the calculation of seniority An) disciplinar;, suspension from service of more than fiye (5) days shall be deducted from the seniorit;. date. Emplo)ees returning to du!:) follo\\ing dut) -related disabilit) retirement, other authorized lea\'es of absence, or fol!o,\ ing a \ oluntar;, resignation, shall retain their original seniorit) date; minus time spent out ofservice 
I he Department shall maintain a seniorit) list in all stations, districts or bureaus and shall provide a cop) to the Union eve[) si:-:. months 
Subsection 6. When the Department determines that a shift vacanc1 exists in a station, notice of such vacancy shall be posted for ten (10) da1s and read at all roH calls in such station for a period of thr cc (3) calendar days. It shall be the obligation of the police officer desiring the vacant position to indicate in writing his or her desire to fill that vacancy no later than ten ( 10) days from the date the Department first announced the vacancy At the expiration of the ten (] 0) day period referred to in the preceding sentence, the Depmiment shall fill the shift 
vacancy on a seniority basis in accordance with this section A police officer scheduled to go on vacation shall complete an approved form prior to departing on vacation in which the police officer shall indicate his or her desire to be considered for a shift vacancy which may arise 
Seniority shall not apply to the acquisition of specially ratings. When the Department implements the fixes shift concept set forth in Article IX, (Hours of Woik), all shifts will be staffed in accordance with this section 
Medjcal Hardship cases are the only exception to seniority requirements and may be permitted for a limited period of time upon agreement of the commanding officer and the shift representatives of the station involved 
16 
Emplo) ees shall ha, e the right and option to pick their shift by seniorit}, ,dth preference gi, en to emplo_, ees in the order of their seniorit) A seniorit:, pick shall be made once in each fiscal year after July !, 1988 On or before March 1, !988 the initial seniorit} pick shall be made to be effective Jul) I, 1988, Each seniority pick after Jul) I, 1988 shall remain in force for a one (!)-)ear period, At the end of such one (])-year period and at the end of e,e0 consecutive one (lhear period thereafter, there shall be a new pick When a shift opening becomes a,ailable because of a transfer or leave ofabsence, ret\rt;ment, death, resignation, or because of a ne,\ly authorized or created positions), or for an) other reason, it shall be posted for fifteen (15) calendar days thereafter, and a seniority pick in accordance i\ith the above provision terms of bidding for the shift opening shall thereafter be made, notwithstanding the provisions aforementioned that seniority picks shall be made on a yearly basis afte1 July 1, 1988 The Commissioner 

shall assign emplO} ees to shifts in accordance with such pick within ten (10) days after the pick is completed. All employees shall be required to make their pick within ten ( l 0) days of notice therefor. All picks shall be made within one (1) month after first posting of the pick Employees not electing to exercise their seniority rights to fill a shift opening or to make a seniority pick shall maintain their then shift assignment and their seniority rights vis-a-vis other employees in the event ofother shift openings or to make a seniority pick When an employee is transfe!l'ed from one station or unit to another, the employee may not exercise station shift seniority rights until a shift vacancy occurs after said transfer For the pmposes of this Section, shift seniority shall flow from night shift to day shift. Because of the fixed seniority staffing concept, there shall be no rotating early and late shi fls 
Effective to begin in December 1998, the annual shift pick shall be cond,icted so as to become effective January 1'1 The open period for the annual shift pick shall run from December 1st through December 15th each year, at which 
time the bidding shall be closed and the final roster(s) posted 

Section 2 .. Scheduling of Overtime 
In emergencies or as the needs ofthe service require, emplo) ees 
ma) be required to perform Q\ertime ,,ork, provided that 
emplo; ees regularI) scheduled for a da) off or a vacation 
day will be the last to be called for mandatof) overtime on 
scheduled events Emplo) ees shall be given as much advance 
notice as possible of O\ertime work Scheduled overtime shall 
be posted and distributed to all emplo) ees on an equitable 
and fair basis, in the same manner as set forth in Article XII 
entitled "Pa)ing Police Details" hereof Employees, other than 
those required to work be; and their normal tour of duty due 
the exigencies of their workday (such as a late ambulance run, 
etc) shall have the option of declining offered overtime, but in 
the event that sufficient personnel do not accept such offered 
overtime on a voluntary basis, OJ in the event of emergency 
situations where time is ofthe essence in executing the overtime 
job, such additional person.nel as are deemed necessary by the 
City may be required to work overtime on an assigned basis All employees shall be afforded the opportunity to accept overtime service, but there shall be no discrimination against any employee who declines to work overtime on a voluntary basis. The Department wilt seek to avoid assigning overtime (as contrasted with voluntary overtime) to employees working a "short day," so called, on days off, or working with n-ight platoons who arc rnqufred to attend court, etc. (see Article X, entitled "Court Time"), between their tours o'f duty or on days off, so that such employees may be afforded every opportunity for required rest or to attend to their personal business before and after working hours or on a day off. 
Section 3. Overtime Service All assigned, authorized or approved service outside OJ out of turn of an employee's regular scheduled tour of duty ( other than paying police details), including service on an employee's scheduled day off, or during his vacation, and service performed pdor to the scheduled starting time for his regular tom of duty, 
18 

and sen ice performed subsequent to the scheduled time for conclusion of his regular tom of dut), including the assigned, authorized or appro\ ed sen ice of patrolmen-detectives or plainclothesmen, and including court time as set forth in Article X, entitled "Court fime", shall be deemed overtime service subject to the folio,\ ing rules: 
A If duty requires an emplo) ee to work be) and his normal quitting time of his scheduled tour of duty: 
(!) The first fifteen (15) minutes of such service shall not be deemed overtime service. The City agrees that this provision will not be used as a basis of discrimination against or punishment of individual emplo) ees 
(2) 
Ifan employee works more than fifteen (15) minutes but thirty (30) minutes or less of such service, he shall be deemed to have performed one-half hour of overtime service. 

(3) 
!fan employee works more than thirty (30) minutes of such service, such overtime service shall be rounded off(and paid for) to the next quarter hour 



B If any employee who has left his place of employment or last duty assignment after having completed work on his regular tour of duty is recalled to his unit, district, division, or bureau, or to any otlier place, and he reports thereat, 01 if an employee is so recalled on a scheduled day off or during his vacation, he shall be paid on an overtime basis for all such time and shall be guaranteed a minimum of four (4) hours of ove1time recall pay It is understood that the four-hour guaranty docs not apply when an employee is called in early to work prior to the normal starting time of his scheduled tour of duty and works continuously from the time he reports into his normal scheduled tour of duty, in which event such employee s~all receive overtime pay only for the actual time work6d prior to the commencement of such tour 
. -----•-..,..:......-,--=--··;.,.. ~1:-=-___.~:_:_:,. _:..·~., __:·-:-:·_-:·. 
! 
C Overtime service shall not include: 
(1) 
An out-of~turn tour ofdut, \\hich is substiruted for a regular!) scheduled tour ofdut;. b)· mutual ap-eement between the Department and the emplo) ee; 

(2) 
S\\apped tours ofduty beh\een individual emplO) ees by their mutual agreement (subject to District approval); 

(3) 
A change in the schedule of an emplo) ee \vho is shifted from one platoon to another platoon or from one shift (tour) to another shift (tour) for a period of fourteen (14) or more consecutive calendar da) s, or a change in the schedule of an emplo) ee who is shifted from one platoon to another platoon or fro111 one shift (tom) to another shift (tour) for a period of less than fourteen (14) consecutive calendar days off or the purpose of (a) i6-s:,.rvice trailli!lg or courses, (b) bringing prisoners ack into the City's jmisdiction, or (c) appearance at hearing(s) before Police Commissioner as a defendant on charges pursuant to Chapter 31, Section 43 of the General Laws; 

(4) 
An out-of~tmn tour of duty which is substituted for a regularly scheduled tour of duty for the purpose of appearance at hearing(s) before the Police Commissioner as a defendant on cha115es pursuant to Chapter 31, Section43 ofthe General laws (D) 



D.. Except for the potential changes of the shifts of officers assigned to the drug control unit including drug control officers detailed to the districts, the scheduled tours of duty of individual employees or groups of employees will not be changed or altered for the purpose of avoiding the overtime provisions ofthis Article 
E. The parties agree that in those situations where an officer; so authorized, (l) engages in the transport ofprisoner(s), or (2) serves as an out-of-state or in-state witness, which 
20 

the Department determines shall result in an o\·emight stay for the officer, such officer shall be compensated with his/her regular pay plus eight hours at the overtime rate for each day ofsen•ice except that where an overnight stay causes the officer to remain away on the officer's da} off, sixteen hours of pa} at an overtime rate shall be paid Members of the bomb squad shall not receive any overtime pay where attending a training program or similar seminar or conference results in an overnight stay 
F Training Training Issues: 
The parties agree to amend and/or c!ari:f) their collective bargaining agreement and exJSting practices to reflect the following rules relative to training: 
For training programs scheduled for five (5) days or more, officers may be assigned to a five and two schedule; 
For overnight training assignments, officers shall receive two (2) homs of overtime compensation for siudy and preparation performed outside of the scheduled training day. If the officer is required to remain overnight on a Saturday or Sunday, he shall receive four ( 4) hours of overtime for each such day; 
With respect to overnight training, any travel that occurs outside of the five work days (i.e , the Sunday before or the Saturday after a Monday through Friday training week) shall be treated as a tour worked out of tum provided that the distance traveled is greater than one hundred and fifty (150) miles from the City of Boston Accordingly, the officer shall receive a compensatory day for ttavel occurring in the aforementioned fashion; 
For all training, officers shall receive eight (8) hours of' straight time pay for the first 5 days oftraining. Officers 
21 
shall recei\ e O"\ ertime compensation for actual training that extends besond eight (8) hours during the fast five 
(5) da:,s of training and for an) training hours scheduled on the sixth ( 6L1) and se\ enth (7"') da:, of each\\ eek; 
With respect to training programs scheduled for four ( 4) da) s or less, the training is scheduled on one or both of the officer's regularly scheduled day(s) ofr; he shall receive a compensation da) (WI) for each da) oftraining HO\vever, if the training and the officers regularly scheduled da) off fall on a Saturda) and/or a Sunda), the officer at his/her discretion shall be entitled to either receive a compensator) da) (s) (WI) or overtime for the actual training on such da)(s) Any compensator) da)S (WI) awarded pursuant to this provision shall be used at anytime at the officers discretion except on First Night, 
the day of the Boston Marathon and the Caribbean Festival; 
For t~_aining that does not require an overnight stay, on officer shall not be compensated for travel time, unless the training takes place sixty (60) miles or more from Boston Police Headquarters, in which case the officer shall receive two (2) hours of overtime for commuting to and two (2) hours of overtime commuting from the trnining Should training take place one hundred twenty 
(120) to one hundred and fifty(! 50) miles from Boston Police Headquarters the officer shall receive three (3) hours of overtime commuting to and three (3) hours of overtime commuting from the training; 
The overtime compensation benefits described herein shall not apply to the FBI Academy in Quantico, VA Officers so assigned shall receive their regular compensation for such assignments 

Section 4. Method of Compensation f01 Overtime Service 
A An employee who performs overtime service in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement shall 
22 

recei, e, in addition to his regular \\ eek!} compensation, time-and-one-half his straight-time houri} rate for each hour of O\ ertime sen ice. The straight-time hourly rate shall be computed as one fortieth of an empiO} ee's regular\\ eekly compensation 
B Empie: ees shall not be required to accept compensator: time off in lieu of monetary compensation for overtime sen ice 
C. Pa)' for o\'ertime service shall be in addition to and not in lieu ofholida) pa: or vacation pay, and shali be remitted to ernplo) ees as soon as practicable after the \Yeek in which such overtime service is performed 
D An emplo) ee \\ho is not scheduled to work on a holiday but who is called in to work on such holiday shall receive double his straight-time homly rate for each hour ofsuch service in lieu of the time-and-one-half rate specified in Paragraph A ofthis section (but not in lieu ofholiday pay) An employee who is called in for overtime service during his vacation shall receive, in addition to the overtime compensation otherwise provided under Paragraph A of this Section; a compensatory day offfor each such day of vacation on which he performs overtime service 
Section 5, In the event that, during a situation of an emergency nature, two 12-hout tours of duty are put into effect, all service in excess of eight hours on any such tour shall be deemed overtime service 
Section 6. Overtime, court time and holiday pay, shall be paid within (30) days from the date earned. The City agrees to pay interest on an annual rate of twelve percent (12%) for any amount owed and not paid within such thirty (30) day period. The City agrees to pay interest at an annual iate of twelve percent (12%) for any paid detail amount owed and not paid within a twenty-eight 
(28) day period. 
23 

ARIICLEX COURI IL\!E Section 1. An employee on dut) at night or on \'acation, furlough or on a da) off: who attends as a witness or in other capacit)-in the performance of his dut;. for or in behalf of the Commonwealth or the Cit), or in response to a Ia,\ful subpoena sened by a private litigant in a criminal or other case (must be job related) pending in an) district court, including the municipal court of the Cit) of Boston, any juvenile court, or any superior court, or before any grand jur} proceedings, or in conference ,,ith a District Attorne; or Assistant District Attorne), or at any pretrial conference or any other related hearing or proceeding, or who is required or requested b) any city, count), town, state, or the federal government or subdivision or agency of any of the foregoing to attend or appear before any department, agency, board, commission, division or authority, or official, of the state or federal government, or subdivision or agency of any of the foregoing, or who attends as a witness or in other capacity in the performance of his duty for the government of the United States, the Commonwealth or the City in a criminal or other case pending in a federal disttict court, or before a grand jury proceeding, OJ a United States Commissioner; or in conference with a United States Attorney or Assistant United States Attorney, m at any pre-trial conference or any other related hearing or proceeding, shall be entitled to overtime compensation for every hour or fraction thereof during.which he was in such attendance OI appearance, but in no event less than (4) hours such pay on an overtime service basis, provided, however, that if he so attends or appears, during any one day, on more than one such occasion, he shall be entitled to such additional pay from the time of first such attendance on such day to the time oflast such attendance on such day; provided, further, that ifany such occasion occurs on a holiday which falls on an employee's day off or during his vacation, the employee shall receive the additional pay due him under the holiday and vacation provisions of this Agreement 
24 

Section 2 .. An emplo) ee performing court-time dut) after completing a last-half tour and scheduled to report for his next regular tour of duty at 4:30 P lvf. on the same da} may at his option report for work at 6:30 PM. and work until the end of his scheduled tour of duty, provided he has notified his district, division, unit, or bureau to such effect prior to 2:00 P.M on such <la} 
Section 3 
An emplo) ee \vho is scheduled to be off duty and who is required by the Department to make a delivery of_' drugs to, or a pickup of drugs from the FO(!d and Drug Administration for 
use in court as evidence, shall receive two (2) hours' pay on an overtime service basis for each Such delivery or pickup, in addition to pay for court time otherwise provided under this Article. 
ARIICLEXI 




HOLIDAYS 

Section 1 The following days shall be considered holidays for the purposes enumerated below: 
New Years Day Independence Day Martin 1uther King, Jr Day labor Day Washington's Birthday Columbus Day Evacuation Day Veterans' Day 
Patriots' Day Thanksgiving Day Memorial Day Christmas Day Bunker Hill Day 
or the foJlowing Monday, if any day aforesaid falls on Sunday 
For the purpose ofthis Article, the "holiday" is the twenty-four 
(24) hour period commencing at 8:00 AM ol each day listed in this Section 
25 
·1 

Section 2 .. When aTI) ofthe aforementioned holida) sfalls on anemplO) ee's schedu!ed \\·orkda) or on an emplo) ee's scheduled da) of For during his \ acation or during an) period of an employee's paid injured lea\e not exceeding t\\ent)-four (24) consecuti\e months, he shall recei\e, for each such holida), in addition to his regular \\eeki) compensation, an additional da) 'spa), computed as one-fourth of his regular \\eek!) compensation Holiday pa) shall be computed as one-fourth (1/4) of regular \\eek!) compensation. Such Holiday Pay shall be considered part ofregu Jar\\ eek!} compensation for purposes of sick leave, injured leave, vacation and other authorized lea\-e compensation and for pension contribution computation 
Section 3. Notwithstanding an) thing in the preceding Section to the contrary, if an emplo) ee is absent on account of illness ( other than paid injured leave) on a holiday which is his scheduled workday, or if an employee is absent on account of illness both on his scheduled tour of duty immediately prior to and on his scheduled tour of duty immediately subsequent to a holiday which falls on a scheduled day off, or ifan employee is granted permission to take an unscheduled day offon a holiday which is his scheduled workday, such employee shail receive his regular weekly compensation for the week in which such holiday falls but shall not receive additional compensation for such holiday 
ARIICLEXII PAYING POLICE DEI,\JLS 


Definition: 
A paid detail is a police service performed by a full-time sworn Boston Police Officer during his off-duty time which is paid for by the person 01 persons making the request for such service and which is related in any way to the performance of police duties such as, but not limited to, security or traffic control, whether performed in uniform or in plainclothes The following pmcedure will be adhered to in the assignment and recording ofall paying police details 
26 
(a) 
All emplo)ees \\ill sign.if) in \Hiting from time to time their desire to accept or not to accept pa) ing police details and a current file on this subject will be maintained in each unit, district, diYision and bureau The e.'(changing of pa) ing details or the use of substitutes beh\-een employees is permitted pro\iding it is done in accordance with existing procedure 

(b) 
All assignments to pa) ing police details shall be made in accordance with the existing procedure Emplo) ees shall be given the ma"Ximi.Im possible advance notice of paying detail assignments. An) employee \vho refuses a paying detail shall not be removed from the detail list, but any such refusal shall be recorded for purposes of detail assignment as a detail actually worked under the heading "detail refusal" (DR) with the detail hours thereof noted, in determining the equitable and fair distribution of details to such employee 

(c) 
The recording and posting of paid details shall be done in accordance with the existing procedure Details shall be posted on detail distribution forms acceptable to the parties hereto, which forms shall set forth the employee's name, details worked, name of person, fum, corporation 01 entity serviced, number of hours wo1ked, and compensation received per detail, detail refosals1 and applicable dates 

(
d) Any employee who performs a paying detail not officially assigned by such superior office1 and recorded and reported as required by this Agreement will not be protected by the provisions of G L (Tcr Ed.) e 41, s. 100, as amended 

(e) 
Any employee who knowingly performs a paying detail not officially fully recorded and reported on such forms within twenty-four (24) hours 


27 
2fter per£i:m11ance ma; be subject to Department disciplinar:,. action The assignment of such a detail ma:, at the Associatio~ 's option, constitute a griern.nce under this Agreement 
(f) An emplo)ee's claim that he has not recei\ed his/ her fair share of details pursuant to the pro, is ions of this Article shall constitute a grievance under this Agr:ement The Association's claim that pa1ing details are not being distributed fairh and equitabh shall sim ilarl1 constitute a grieva~ce under thi·s 
Agreement 

(g) 
Detail distribution fonns shall be official rcco1 ds of the Department and shall be made available to the Association for its inspection and use upon its request when and if removed from the bultetin bo::trd or other place of posting 

(h) 
No paying detail assignments shall be made until the person, firm, corporation, or entity requesting or required to have such details has agreed to pay the following rates of pay per employee, namely: 


(I) 
Effective March 2, 2006, the following paid detail rntes shall be in force and effect: 


A Redline Details $3 7 00 per hom 
a "special event" -details required at Special Events (i e, parades, toad races) tbat the Chief of the Bureauof Field Services designates as Redline details, except that all details at Fenway Park and the TD North Bank Garden shall be designated as Redline detatls; and 
b "rcdlinc details" -constt uction and traffic details that are performed on streets included in the City of Boston's then cuncnt List of Snow Emergencies Arteries and/or its then current List of Streets Designated as Primary Evncuation Routes provided that Sllch streets fall within the jurisdiction of the 
28 
Boston Police Department 
B Standard Details S33 00 per hour Standard details shall include all details not designated or established as Redline details 

All paid details shall ha,e a guarantee of four (4) hours pa} per detail for each emplO) ee so assigned 
Details that exceed si:--(6) hours shall be paid as eight (8) hours to the eighth (8"') hour Time worked be1ond eight (8) hours shall be paid at the straight time rate With respect to outside construction details onlv, anv time worked be, ond four (4) hours up to the eighth (871'). ho~r shall be paid as ~ight 
(8) 
hours. Time in excess or eight (8) hours shall be paid at the straight time detail rate 

(2) 
Effective with the signing of this Agreement (1981­1982 MOA), the Police Commissioner agrees to restore Paying Police Details in licensed premises under such conditions as the Police Commissioner may determine 

(3) 
I he parties hereto shall meet at an early date subsequent to the execution of the Agreement (1981-1982 MOA) to ncgotiate an equitable procedure for the distribution of paid details and other matters relating to the paid detail system The Association and the Police Commissioner hereto may, by mutual agreement, from time to time revise upward said homly rate and the minimum of guaranteed hours per detail aforementioned, and establish premium rates of pay for certain details. 

(4) 
The City agtees to assign one additional officer to the paid detail section on the 4:00 PM to Midnight shift 

(5) 
The parties agree to discuss the issues ofdetails, ineluding the ccntrnlization of the detail system, dming the life of this Agreement (1993-1996 Anderson Award). 

(i) 
Police cadets and reserve police officc1s shall not be entitled to receive extra paying details 


29 
U) Upon execution of this Agreement (1981-1982 MOA), the City agrees to enforce any existing City ordinances \\ irh respect to the use of Boston Police Officers on paid details Failure of a wndor to comply with the aforementioned ordinances either at the licensing state or compliance stage wil! not result in liabilit) to the Cit) if it has made a good-faith effort to require such compliance 
(k) I'he City of Boston and the Department herein agree to create a Paid Detail Fund pursuant to the provisions of G L c 44, section 35C Said Paid Detail Fund shall be created and in operation no late1 than October I, I 984 
EmploJees performing a lawful paid detail shall be compensated for that paid detail out of the Paid Detail Fund no later than twenty-one (21) working days after the emplo) ee has performed the paid detail provided said emp!o}ee has submitted a paid detail card to the Paid Detail Fund slating that the employee in fact performed the detail for which payment is requested 
(I) Notwithstanding any other prov1s1on of this Agreement (1984-1987 MOA) to the contrary, for Paid Detail purposes only. Division F shall be deemed to consist of (a) members of the bargaining unit assigned to Division F, (b) members of the bargaining unit assigned to Police Headquarters, and ( c) members of the bargaining unit assigned to Team Police All excess paid detail opportunities from other Areas or Divisions will be forwarded to Division F for distribution. In the event these paid detail opportunities arc not filled by Division F; the opportunities will then be forwarded to the Paid Detail Service for distribution 
30 

ARI!ClE XIII FIINESS TO REIUlli'i IO WORK AFTER SERVICE-CO:-.c(ECTED SICKNESS L'il1TRY OR DISABILITY 
Section 1 
An employee absent from dut) on account ofsickness, injuf) or disabilit;. incurred in the performance ofhis, dut;.·, without fault on his part, shall be entitled to examination and treatment b) 
a ph)sician of his 0\\n choice. His ph)sician shal) be afforded full opportunity to consult with the Cit) 's Police Department ph) sician prior to an: deterrniriation by such City physician as to the employee's fitness to resume full or partial police duty If partial police duty is in questioni the Police Commissioner shall specify the particular partial policy duty to be performed. If the employee's phJsician and such City physician disagree as to such "fitness," they shall thereupon jointly designate a physician agreeable to both, who at the City's expense, shall examine the employee and render an advisory \.Vritten medical opinion as to the employee's fitness to return to duty, copies of which shall be transmitted by him to both the City's physician and the employee's physician In the event of their inability to agree upon a third physician, a physician shall be jointly selected by them from a list of panel of physicians established or suggested by the Commissioner of Public Health for the Commonwealth of Massachusetts in cooperation with the parties hereto, upon which event such physician, at the City's expense, shall so examine the employee and render his opinion as aforesaid. Pending receipt of such advisory opinion and action of the City physician thereupon, the City shall not require the employee to return to duty and shall continue to foll)' compensate him on paid injured leave for lost time due to any such absence. It is understood that "sickness" as used herein means sickness incurred in the line of duty resulting in paid injured leave and does not include sickness not incurred in the line of duty which may result in sick leave 
-,-,-------~------------­
--·-·-~ ---------·---~---­
If an emplo) ee is ordered to perfom1 partial dut) under this 
Section, said dut) shall be performed at the w6rk location to 
\\hich the emplo:,ee \\as assigned at the time of the injul") 
Howe\ er, \\·bile there are more than t\\O (2) officers on a shift in 
a district/unit\\ ho are occup) ing partial du!) positions pursuant 
to this Section, the Department ma) ha,e the chronological I} 
third (3rd ) or subsequent officer(s) on the shift in the district/ 
unit perform his/her dut) at any work location determined b) 
the Department An) emplo) ee performing partial dut) under 
this Section at a \\Ork location other than the district/unit to 
which the;-are assigned at the time of their injuf) shall remain 
on the paid detail list of their original district/unit The Union 
representative shall not count to\vards the t\vo (2) officer limit 
and shall not be assigned outside his/her shift and district/unit 
Upon return to full duty, the emplo) ee shall return forthwith 
to the work location and shift to ,,hich he/she was assigned 
at the time of the injury Emplo) ces retain herein all rights 
under Article VI and Article XIII of this Agreement Fort) ­
five (45) working days after an employee commences partial 
duty, the employee may be assigned to partial duty at Police 
Headquarters or other location 
Subject to the approval of the City physician, an employee on less than full duty as defined in this Section may be eligible to perform paid details 
Section 2.. 
It is understood and agreed by the parties hereto that, when an officer is injured or disabled while on duty, the injured or disabled office1 shall be carried "injured on" from the date the City receives notification of said injury or disability until such time as the contrary be shown by the Department at a hearing called for that pmpose and supported by competent evidence and sustained by an arbitrator pursuant to Step 5 of Article VI entitled "Grievance Procedure and Arbitration", of the collective bargaining Agreement. The Association agrees to reimburse the City for any and all funds paid wrongfolly to any officer under an "injured on" status The parties agree to immediately arrange an expedited arbitration process for 
32 

me\ ances filed under this Section. In the e1, ent the officer and/ ~r the Association declines arbitration under this Article, the Department may place the emplo) ee on "sick leaye status" 
Section 3. The requirement that injured/sick officers remain at home unless pennitted to go elsewhere by the Police Commissioner 
is abolished upon ratification of this Agreement The Police Commissioner shall immediately rescind all rules and regulations,,, ith respect to the foregoing requirement 
ARIICLE XIII A REDEl'l1PIION OF SICK LEAVE 

Section I .Annual Redemption An employee who has used fe1rver than five (5) sick days in the twelve-month period ending June 30th ofany) eru may elect to redeem sick days in a lump sum cash payment in accordance 
with the following schedule: 
Annual Sick Days Sick Days Used Rcdemntion 
15  0  10  
14  1  8  
13  2  7  
12  3  5  
11  4  3  
10  5  0  

The pc1 diem will be the patrolmen's rate on June 30th but will not exceed the per diem rate for the rank ofpatrolman as specified in Column 3 of the Salary Schedule in force on.June 30th 
During July, the City will noti'fy each quali'fying employee of his redemption options An employee may elect to redeem all or part of his entitlement in full days. Unredeemed' sick days will be accumulated in the normal manner 
33 

Section 2. Upon retiring from senice in a classification co\'ered by this Agreement, an emplo) ee shall be paid for 40 percent of the accumulated unused sick da) s credited to such emplo) ee at the time of retirement up to a ma...:irnum of 200 da) s, at the dail) rate in effect as of the emplo) ee's retirement date 
Effective upon execution of the Agreement (1996-1998 MOA), the Cit) shall increase the cash reimbursement percentages upon retirement to forty percent (40%) The current two hundred (200) da) cap shall continue to apply to all members 
Section 3 Sick leave buy back or redemption payments shall be paid to the emplo) ee no later than December I of each) ear 
ARTICLE XIV LABOR MANAGEMENI COMMII IEE 

Section 1. The City and the Association shall jointly maintain and support a labor-Management Committee. The Committee shall consist of not more than ten (10) members who shali serve for the tcnn of this Agreement. The Association shall designate five 
(5) members and the Police Commissioner shall designate (5) members, at least one of whom shall be at the rank of Deputy Superintendent or above. Vacancies for designated members shall be filled respectively by the Association and the Police Commissioner for thebalanceoftheterm to be served. Each party may designate alternates. At each meeting, the Committee shall select a chairman from among its members The selection shall be made alternately from the group of members designated by the Police Commissioner and the group of members designated by the Association. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the total membership of the Committee. The Committee shal! -~ meet monthly on the second Wednesday of each month or on any other day mutually agreeable. Each party shall provide to the other party, at least one week in advance of the meeting, a 
written agenda of matters to be discussed 
34 

Section 2 The Committee shall make its recommendations to the Police Commissioner in ,, riting and the members designated b) each party shall state their position(s) in ,Hiting The Police Commissioner shall gi,e his ans,,ers to the recommendation and/or statement of position of the Committee or its members in \Hi ting Ifsuch recommendation and/or statement ofposition is recei\ ed by the Police Commissioner on or before the tenth calendar da) folio,, ing an) such meeting, his ,Hitten ans,, er shall be giwn at the next scheduled meeting. In the event that an; such recommendation and/or statement of position is received b; the Commissioner after the tenth calendar day follo,\ing an) such meeting, his written answer shall be gi\en on or before the next scheduled meeting following his receipt of such recommendation and/or st8.tement of position 
Section 3. The function and role of the labor-Management Committee shall extend to the following: 
A Matters concerning the administration or interpretation of this Agreement or an; supplement or amendment thereto; 
B Department projects, programs, personnel policies and practices which may affect or bear upon wages, hours, or conditions of employment of employees covered by this Agreement, including matters not subject to the grievance and arbitration procedure 
Ihe parties shall freely exchange information to facilitate the function and role of the labor-Management Committee 
Section 4 .. The provisions of this Article shall not preclude the establishment of othm mutual agreement, nor in any way or manner limit or derogate from the function and purpose of the Association's Gdevance Committee established pursuant to Article VI of this Agreement Section 5, The President of the Association and the Police Commissioner shall meet once a month to discuss marrers of mutual interest 

ARIICLEXV OTHER LEAVES OF ABSENCE 

Section 1 Subject to the operating needs ofeach unit, district, di, ision, or bureau, determined by the superior officer in charge, leave of absence" ithout loss of pay,, ill be permitted for the fo llo,,ing reasons: 
(a) 
Attend:mce by an employee ,vho is a veteran as defined in Section 21, Chapter 31, of the General Laws as a pallbearer, escort, bugler, or member of a firing squad or color detail, at the funeral ot memorial services of a veteran, as so defined, or of any person who dies under other than dishonorable circumstance while serving in the armed services of the United States in time of war or insunection; 

(b) 
Attendance by an employee who is a veteran as defined in Section 21, Chaptc[ 31, of the General 1aws, as a delegate or alternate to state or national conventions of certain veterans' organizations as designated from time to time, during the life of this Agreement, by the Mayor; 


(c) 
Inoculation required by the City; (cl) Red Cross blood donations authorized by the Department; 

(d) 
Promotional examinations conducted under Civil Sctvicc law and rules fot promotion to pay position in the service of the Department; 

(e) 
Medical examinations for retirement purposes; (g) Attendance at educational prngrams required 01 authodzccl by the City 


36 

Section 2. Military Le:.i\·e 
E\ er:, emplo_\ ee CO\ ered b) this Agreement\', ho is a member 
of a resen e component ofthe am1ed fo,ces of the United States 
shall be granted, in accordance \\ ith Section 59 of Chapter 33 
of the General lm\s, ka,e of absence with pa}, durino the 
time of his annual tour of dut) as a member of such re:ef\ e 
component; pro, ided, ho\\ e\ er that such lea\ e shall not exceed 
(l 7) calendar da} s 
Section 3.. Death in the Immediate Family 
Effecti,e upon execution of this Agreement (1979-198 J 
Agreement), five days' leave of absence, with pay, will be 
allowed an emplo) ee in the case of.the death of his spouse, or 
an; body in either ofthe following relationships to the emplo) ee 
or the emplo)'ee's spouse: father, mother, brother, sister, child, 
grandchild, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, or grandparents These 
leaves shall begin at the morning roll call following receipt of 
notice of death, and cmplo;ees aflected shall be excused from 
tours of duty intervening between receipt ofnotice ofdeath and 
the morning roll call. Sufficient time to attend the foneral of 
other near relatives may be allowed without loss ofpay with an 
extension of such time in any particular case at the discretion 
of the Police Commissioner 
If an employee entitled to leave without loss of pay under this Section requires additional leave for such purposes, leave for such ptupose shaU be deducted from sick leave. 
Section 4. Pregnancy-Maternity Leave Whcnevet a female employee shall become pregnant, she shall furnish the Police Commissioner with a certificate from her phy~ician slating the expected date of her delivery She may conturne to work so long as her physician certifies that she is able to do so provided that the Commissioner does not find her work performance is impaireel. Mate1 nity leave without pay shall be grnnted commencing with cessation of actual work 
undei the preceding sentence, for a pedod not to exceed one 
(J) year after date of dclive1y 
ARTICLE ;(VI i\1ISCE1LAMOUS 

Section L Association Bulletin Boards Space\\ ill be pro, ided in units, districts, di\ isions, and bureaus at places of assembl: of the ernplo:, ees for Association bulleti.n boards of reasonable size, to be supplied b;, the Association, for the posting of announcements relating to Association business 
Section 2 Orders Copies of general orders, special orders, and personnel orders shall be supplied to the Association upon request and copies of such orders iss11ed subsequent to the effective date of this Agreement shall be supplied to the Association at time ot issuance 
Scctio n 3 Sever ability Should any provision of this Agreement or any supplement thereto to be held invalid by any court or tribunal of competent jurisdiction, or if compliance with m enforcement of any such provision should be restrained by any court, all other provisions of this Agreement and any supplement thereto shall remain in for cc, and the parties shall negotiate immediately for a satisfactory replacement for any such provision 
Section 4 Benefits 
Except as improved herein, all benefits specified in the published rules and regulations, general and special orders in force on the effective date of this Agreement shall be continued in force for the duration of this Agreement No employee shall suffer a reduction in such benefits as u consequence of the execution of this Agreement "Benefits'' hereunder shall be deemed to include by way of e:s:amplc and not by way of [imitution, sick leave, vacation leave, and paid injL1rcd leave 
Section 5 Ihe provisions of this Agreement supersede: any conilicling or inconsistent rnle, r cgulation or order promulgated by the Police 
38 

Commissioner In the e\ ent aTI) statute(s) rc:lating to mc:mbers of the Police Department pro,-ides or sets fortb benefits or terms in excess of or more ad, antageous than the benefits or terms of this Agreement, the pro\ isions of such statute{s), to the e:-.:tent not forbidden b) law, shall prevail. In the e\ ent this Agreement provides or sets forth benefits or terms in excess of or more advantageous than those pro\ ided or set forth in an} such statute(s), the pro\ isions of this Agreement shall pre,ail 
Section 6 Health and Safety Both parties to this Agreement shall cooperate in the enforcement of safety rules and regulations. Complaints with respect to unsafe and unhealthy working conditions shall be brought immediate!) to the attention of:rn employee's superior officer and shall be a subject of grievance hereunder. 
l he City and the Association shall establish a joint safoty committee: consisting of not more than five (5) representatives of each party for the purpose of promoting sound safety 
practices and mies 
Section 7., Health Insurance The Cit) 's contribution to all group hospitalization insurance premiums shall be as follows: 
a Effective January I, 2008 the City's rate of conttibution for all approved and authorized health maintenance organizations shall be 87 5% Ihc employee's rate of contribution for all approv1cd and authorized health maintenance organizations shall be 12 5% 
b Effective January I, 2009 the: City's rate of contribt1tion fot all approved and author izcd health maintenance 01ganizations shall be 85% The employee's rate of contribution for all approved and authorized health maintenance organizations shall be 15% 
c Effective January l, 2008 the City's rate of contribution for all approved and authorized point 0£ service products 
39 
shall be 82.5% The employee's rate of contribution for all apprm ed and authorized point of sen ice pr'oduct shall be 17.5% 
d Effocti\ e Janu~ · I, 2009 the Cit) 's rate of contribution for all apprm, ed and authorized point ofservice products shall be 80%. The emplo) ee's rate of contribution for all approved and authorized point of ser. ice product shall be20¾.. 
e Effective Janu~ !, 2007 the City shall cease to ofter Master Medical to bargaining unit members. On July 1, 2007 the City shall offer the indemnity PPO known as Blue Care Elect Preferred. The City's rate ofcontribution for the indemnity PPO shall be 75%. The employee's rate ofcontribution shall be 25% 
f Adoption ofM.G .1 Chapter 32B § 18 
i The Union agrees to support legislation that would all ow Cities and Towns to adopt Section 18 and have the option of applying the provisions of Section 18 prospectively 
ii. In the event the legislature takes no action on the above-mentioned matter by June 30, 2008, the Union will support the adoption of Section 18, in its cunent form, by the Boston City Council. 
iii Upon adoption by the Boston City Council, the City will meet with the Union and bargain over the impact that the adoption will have on cturent members upon their retirement. The Union agrees that it will not require City to bargain such impacts as part of subsequent successor bmgaining agreement even if the parties are already in negotiations for a successor bargaining agreement 
g. Health Insurance Opt-Out 
Effective July 1, 2007, bargaining unit members declining 
40 

the City's health insurance benefit shall be eligible for the City's opt-out insurance benefit pursuant to the City's health insurance polic;-. Those bargaining unit members shall receive fifteen hundred dollars (S 1,500) annually for opting­out of an individual plan or twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500) annuall: for op.ting-out of a family plan under the abo,e mentioned policy 
El h>:ibili tv 
fo participate employees must currentl) be enrolled in, or have been enrolled in, medical coverage through the City of Boston and drop the coverage during the Open Enrollment period for at least one) ear; 
EmplO) ees are not eligible for the payment unless they have coverage under another plan Other plans include: 
a. 
Your spouse's/partner's plan (as long as he or she is covered by someone other than the City of Boston, Boston Water and Sewer Commission or the Boston Public Health Commission); 

b. 
A private plan; 

c. 
A plan offered through a second employer (if you have anothe1 job that provides health care benefits); 

d. 
A retiree health plall from an employer other than 


01 

I 
I 
l one ofthe City of Boston groups 
i 
Section 7a.Accidcntal Death Insurance .. 
Pursuant to the prnvisio11 of General Laws Chapter 32B,
I 
I Section I ID, the City shall pay 99 percent of the premium cost for se1vicc--connccted group accidental death insmancc of
J 
twice the mmdmum amount to which each eligible employee would be entitled if insured for the maximum amount of group accidental death and dismemberment insurance provided under General Laws Chapter 32B, Section 1 I A. 
41 
Such insurance CO\ erage shall be provided as soon as insurance can be obtained from a carrier in accordance \, ith public contract bidding lm, s and the terms ofsaid insurance ha\e been approwd b) th~ Massachusetts Group Insurance Commission as required b) General La\\ s Chapter 32B, Section I ID 
It is understood that the City may decide to be a self~insurer, in\\ hich case coHrage shall be effecti\ e as of Jul) 1, 1972 In the absence of an effecti\e insurance policy, the Cit) shall be deemed a self-insurer hereunder. If not already accepted, the City agrees to submit Chapter 383 of the Acts of 196 7 to the Cit:, Council for acceptance 
Section 8. In requesting fonding for this Agreement the Ma) or shall request funds for the creation of the position of Police Department Chaplain, with the appointment of said position to be made by the Police Commissioner. 
Section 9 .. Access to Personnel Files 
(a) 
No material originating from the City derogatory to an employee's condt1ct, service, character, or personality shaU be placed in the personnel files unless the employee has had an opportunity to read the material The employee shall acknowledge that he has read such material by affixing his signature on the act11ai copy to be filed. Such signature does not necessarily indicate .agreement with its contents, but merely signifies that the employee has read the material to be filed 

(b) 
The employee shall have the right to answer any material filed and his answer shall be attached to the file copy 

(c) 
No material which contains an allegation of misconduct against an employee shall be included in his/her personnel file until the charges have been vcdfied by affidavit and a hearing held If a determination is made that the allegation is without substance, then the allegation shall not be included in the employee's personnel file 


42 
(d) J\n} employee shall ha, e the right, on request at reasonable times, and on his own time, to examine all material in bis personnel file\\ hich is neither confidential or privileged under law, in the presence of an official in the Personnel Office. A copy of any such material shall be furnished the emplO) ee at his request. 
Section 10.. 
The parties agree that matters agreed upon b} negotiations upon expiration of the current contract shall be made effective retroaeti,el) as the said expiration date. 
Section 11 Personal Leave Benefit In each fiscal year, each employee 'shall be credited with and shall be entitled to four (4) personal leave tours. 

At the option of each employee, all or any part of an) employee's personal leave entitlement can be taken in the year of entitlement, can be redeemed for cash payment, or can be placed in a bank of accumulated, unused personal leave 
If an employee elects to redeem for cash all or any part of the annual personal leave entitlement, the employee must notify the CiLy on each occasion of such election during the fiscal year involved; provided that the final eleclion notice must be given by the employee no later than June I '1 of each fiscal year 
The City wi!l compensate the employees within thirty 
(30) calendat days ofeach such notice ofredemption, on the basis of one.fourth (I/4th) of the employee's regular weekly compensation for each redeemed personal leave 
tour. 
2 If an employee elects neithe1 to take nor redeem all or any part of the employee's annual personal leave cntitlcmen~ du1ing the accrual ycat, all such portion of unused or unredeemed leave shall be accumulated for the employee's denth or 1ctil'c111c:nt, the employee, or; in 
43 
the event of the employee's death, then the beneficiary of the emplo)ee as designated on the form provided for thc: State Boston Retirement S) stem, shall recei\e a lump sum cash pa) ment equal to one-fourth (I/4th) the employee's regular ,,eekly compensation at the time of such death or retirement for each accumulated personal leave tour to a ma-.:imum oftv,enty-four (24) such tours Such pa} ment \\ ill be made no later than thirty (30) calendar da) s following the date of death or retirement Employees \,ho retire with more than twenty-four (24) 
accumulated personal leave tours will be allowed to use all such tours in excess of the twenl}-four (24) tours to be compensated as leave in the ) ear of and prior to the emplo) ce's retirement 
lhe employee must provide the Police Department with notice of an intention to take a personal leave tour no later than noontime on the calendar day immediately prior ta the personal leave tom involved 

Section 12. Physician's Certificate 
Notwithstanding any departmental rule or regulation or practice to the contrary, if a physician's certificate is required by the Commissioner as evidence of an employee's Absence from work done due to illness, for five (5) consecutive days or more than ten (10) days in a calendar yea!', the D.epartment must·afford such employee an opportunity to obtain such certificate from a physician in the Department or a physician at Boston City Hospital The Department will assume the foll cost charged by such physician(s) or by Boston City Hospital in connection with the certificate At any time after the first year of this Agreement upon a written request by the Association, the parties agree to meet for the purpose of reviewing the experience under this provision and negotiating such changes, if any, that are deemed appropriate in the manner and time that the certificate is to be obtained. If an employee so chooses, 
he may obtain a certificate from a physician other than a physician described above, in which case be will assume the cost thereof 
44 

I .,l 
! 
Section 13 Reimbursement of legal Fees 
Criminal Actions. In the e,ent that an; emplo} ee is charged with committing a criminal offense in the course of this work performance and is subsequently found not guilty of such accusations in a court of law or if such accusations against him are dismissed by a court of law or by an authorized clerk of such court, the Cit}•
j will reimburse such employee for reasonable attorneys' fees 
I and related court costs including but not necessaril) limited
i 
to stenographic foes and » itness fees incurred by him in 
i 
i 
defending himself against those charges. Such pa) ment will be made after review b) the Corporation Counsel of the City of Boston Prevailing rates (as determined by the Massachusetts Bar Association) shall apply · 

Civil Actions. 
The City will represent and indemnify" bargaining unit members to the extent permitted by MG 1 c 258 Section 9 

Section 14. Hospital Liaison Notification 
Ihe hospital liaison officers will notify the BPPA Grievance Committee Chairman in writing when a bargaining unit employee is absent from duty due to injuries or illness requiting admission to a hospital lhe BPPA Grievance Committee member shall be granted leave of absence with pay and with no loss of benefits for time required to discuss and process grievances on an incident which could lead to grievances with the sick or injured employee or others involved. 

Section 15. Vacation Starting lime 
Effective July 1, 1999, vacations for employees under this 
Agreement will start at 8:00 AM on Saturday and shall run to 
8:00 A.M on the following Saturday 01 a subsequent Saturday, depending upon the length ofvacation 
The summer vacation period shall commence the second 
Saturday in June of each calendar year The summer vacation period shall nm for fourteen (14) consecuti\e \\ eeks (se, en (7) t\\ o (2) \\ eek periods) 

Upon recen mg a ,-ritten request signed b:., the requesting officer, that officer's commanding officermay allow that officer to take \\inter ,acation on a one (1) da:., at a time basis Such decision is at the sole discretion of the commanding officer I'he commanding officer's discretion is paramount in such a case and his/her decision regarding an) issue in this paragraph is not subject to the grievance procedure of this agreement 
Ifan officer voluntarily accepts a transfer, or requests a transfer, from one District/Unit to another, and that transfer is granted, or an officer voluntarily changes his/her shift assignment pursuant to Article IX, Section l(b) of this agreement, the officer's commanding officer may change that officer's vacation squad to better reflect the needs of the Department If an officer is involuntarily transforred or has his/her shift assignment changed, the commanding officer shall not, withOlit the approval of the affected officer, change his/her vacation squad until the January I following such involuntary transfer 
or shift change 
Section 16. Legislative Agent One (1) Association member designated by the President and Vice President ofthe Association, as "1 egislative Agent" shall be given time off without loss of compensation or benefits 
whenever the Great and General Court is in session 
Section 17 Physical Standards Members of the bargaining unit employed by the Boston Police Department subsequent to execution of this Agreement (1984-1987 MOA), shall abide by and be subject to the physical standards established by the Department ofPersonnel Administration in document 80-4, known as "Physical Standards for Public Safety Officers," as it may be amended 
46 

Section 18 Vacations Eftecth eon and after Januaf) I, l 988, an} emplo) ee \\ho prior to Januaf) 1", 1988 has commenced his or her twentieth (20th) }ear of sef\ ice, shall recei\ e one \\ eek ohacation in addition to the ,acation lea\ e to\\hich such emplo) ee is alread1 entitled under this agreement 
Vacation lea\ e shall not be accumulated be\ and the end of a calendar } ear except that in the event wher~ sickness or du() related injury prevents an emplo) ee from taking his or her , acation leave in any particular) ear, such vacatio"n leave ma, be taken m the next succeeding year; but in no eyent thereafte~ If the emplo) mcnt of any emplo) ee entitled to a vacation under this agreement is terminated b) dismissal through no fault or delinquenc:., of his part or by resignation, retirement or death without his having been granted such vacation, he or in the case of his death, his estate, shall be paid as provided by law an amount in lieu of such vacation provided that no monetary or other allowance has already been made therefor 
lfthc employment of any employee entitled to vacation leave under this agreement is terminated by retirement or death without the employee having been granted such vacation, he, or in the event of his death, his estate, or his widow or next of kin, shall be paid as provided by Section 111 of Chapter 41 ofthe General Laws, an amount in lieu of such vacation­provided, that no monetary or other allowance has already bee~ made therefor Employees entitled to five weeks of vacation under the agreement may elect to redeem two weeks in cash in lieu of utilizing said week as vacation. Employees entitled to less tfom five weeks ofvacation under the agreement may elect 
to redeem one week in cash in lieu of utilizing such week as vacation Redemption and payment will be made in accordance with the "Personal Leave Benefit" clause ofthis Agreement. 


Section 19.. 
The Department and the Union agree to commence, through the .Joint Health and Safoty Committee, a project which will lead to the formulation of a contractual provision relative to police officers \,ho contract infectious diseases. fhe Joint Health and Safety Committee\\ ill accomplish this project no later than sb: months from the date of ratification of this agreement (l 987­1990 MOA) and parties hereto mutually agree to bargain collectively with respect to the finding and recommendations of the Joint health and Safety Committee 
Section 20. Bullet Proof Vests 
The Department shall provide to all officers a bullet proof vest at no expense to the officer and all officers employed by the Department shall be required to \\ear such vest during the performance of any planned and/or situational e,ent(s) where a reasonable possibility of armed confrontation exists and/or where under similar circumstances the officer's bnrcau chief reasonably deems it necessary The failure ofan officer to wear a bulletproof vest shall not be applicable to the issue of an officer's "injured on" status This provision is not intended to replace or diminish existing Department rules which mandate the wearing of a vest nor is it intended to impose a general requirement of wearing a vest 
The Association and the Department both agree to take affirmative steps, including the education of members, regarding the merits of wearing a vest while on duty 
Section 21. Career Evaluation, Development and !'racking System 
In order to achieve jointly agreed upon goals of making the 
City a safer place for its citizens and visitors, improving 
the productivily and morale of officers, and improving 
communications between the officers, their supervisors, and the Department, the parties agree that the Department may institute the Developmental Roundtable Review System and the Association slmll cooperate in such implementation I he parties further ag1 ee that should issues or concerns relative to the overall System arise subsequent to the implementation of the System, either party may request to meet for the purpose of discussing said concerns 
48 

As part of the S} stem, the Department agrees to ~ain its super. isol'} personnel in the issuance of e\ aluatwns Evaluations shall tak_e place on an annu2.l basis. Officers shall b~ ernluated b:, their immediate supen isor which ma) inc!ude the officer's duty supervisor A copy of completed evaluat:ons shall be placed in the members' personnel file and prov'.ded to ernluated members The Department ma} take evaluations into account in assignments and training The Department shall neither discipline a member as the result ofa subpar evaluation nor take such ernluations into account in promotions 
The Department further agrees to establish an internal appeal panel (Panel). Where a member feels a~gr!eved by an evaluation, the individual member or the Association may file an appeal with the Panel within fifteen (15) calendar. days of the member receiYing the evaluation or such appeal nghts are deemed waived. I he Panel shall conduct a hearing to determine whether the evaluation was fair, reasonable, and/or appropriate The decision of the Panel and individual evaluation is not subject to the grievance and arbitration procedures 

Section 22. Substance Abuse 
The oarties agree that the Substance Abuse Policy which is co~tained in the Boston Police Department's Rules and Regulations is inco1porated herein 
To be effective January 1, 1999, modify Rule 111, Substance Abuse Policy by inserting additional section "G" into "Section V resting" to read as follows: 
G Annual Drug Testing. In a joint desire to achieve and maintain a work force that is I 00% drng free and in fmther recognition that the Department has not yet achieved such goal, the parties agree that all sworn personnel shall be subject to an annual dru~ te:t to b_c conducted through a fair, reasonable, and obJecttvc hall analysis testing system Each office, shall submit to such annual test on or within thirty (30) calendar days ofeach officer's birthday The Department shall schedule each examination and so notify each officer as far in advance as practicable Hair testing doc:s not contemplate or include testing for alcohol 
Hair testin!I orocedurc to be modified to reflect: 
A I hree hair samples \\ ii! be collected at the time of testing 
I  Two samples\\ ill be sent under applicable chain of  
custod} standards to testing lab (ps) chemcdics);  
2  The third sample will be maintained under secure  

storage conditions by BPD 
B. To be identified as positive, the initial test much 
have: 1 Minimum of Sng/ l0mg of cocaine; and 
2. Contain norcocaine (Ing); or 3 Contain Benzyleconine at a ratio of 5% or greater 
C If the initial test is positive, the lab will perform a second test on the second hair sample If the result of that test is within 30% of the result oftbe first test, the result of the first test will be deemed confirmed, provided that the result meets the minimum standard set forth in Section B. Otherwise the test will be deemed negative. 
D A bargaining unit member whose two test results are positive may, a the officer's expense, have the third hair sample tested at an independent laboratory, Quest Laboratodes, at the laboratory's limit detection for the substance(s) in question If the test result does not meet that laboratory's limit of detection for the substancc(s) in question, the test shall be deemed negative 
E Officers who receive a ve1ificd positive test result fot illicit d1ugs and who enter into a Rehabilitation 
50 

...:,..;.-------­
Agreemc:nt \\ ill be subject to random urine tes1ing for the remainder of his/her career 
F. If the o, erall result is negath e all remaining samples "ill be destro) ed 
G The Union agrees to \\ ithdra1, case number 16­1592 (safe!:) net case) \\ ith prejudice but without precedent 

The Department agrees that it will establish and adhere to ,Hitten collection and testing procedures for hair samples These procedures shall be fair and reasonable so as to ensure the accurac) and integrit} of the test and process. These written procedures will be appended to this Rule and become incorporated thereto The Union, should it so request, shall rneet with the Department in order to discuss issues relative to the collection and testing process. Nothing contained herein alters the current policy as it relates to drug/alcohol testing, procedures, or requirements 
Section 23 Residency All members of the bargaining unit must be residents of the City of Boston in accordance with the City of Boston's Residency Ordinance (Ord 1976, c 9) All bargaining unit members who are on the Department payroll July I, 1994 shall be exempt for their tenure with the Boston Police Department. After ten 
(10) years of consecutive foll-time service (01; in the case of bnrgaining unit members who have had a break in service due to a work-related disability, ten (10) years offolHime service in total) from the date of appointment to the bargaining unit, bargaining unit members will be exempted from the Residency Ordinance. 
Section 24. Officers Performing Certain Administrative F11nctions 
Ilic parties agrne that Lwo (2) police officers shall be assigned to perform administrative and/or clerical duties during the day 
shift in each of the District Stations, and an additional two (2) police officers shall be assigned to perform administrative and/ or clerical duties in one administrati\e unit,, hich includes the Youth Violence Task Force, the Bicycle Unit and the Bomb Squad ("the other administrati, e unit") The administrati, e and/or clerical duties to be performed by such officers may include, but shall not be limited to, serving as clerk to the Captain, and performing time and attendance functions When such officers are on vacation, but not on their reQ.Ular days off sick da) s or personal da) s, the) shall be replac~d b) anothe; officer Subject to the forgoing, the Department may assign an} or all of the aforementioned administrati,e and/or clerical duties in the District Stations and the other administrati, e 
unit members of the bargaining unit or to others, at the Commissioner's sole discretion In addition, administrative and/or clerical functions in Ballistics; ISO; Central Suppl); and service as Detectives Clerks ma) be assigned to members of the bargaining unit or to others, at the Commissioner's sole discretion I he parties reserve their respective rights with regard to other assignments 
The union hereby withdraws, with prejudice, the following matters now pending: grievance -/1 16-1557, MUP 06-4632, and MUP 05-4370 


ARIICLE XVII COMPENSAIION 

Section 1. 1he pay schedule for police officers set forth in rule I of the Police Department Compensation Plan dated January 6, !965, as amended (hereinafter called "The 1965 Plan'') shall be amended to provide the following salary schedules: 
Salary Schedule: 
Effective  Fil st Pay Period July 2007  2..5%  
First Pny Period July 2008  3%  
Fhst Pay Period July 2009  3.. 5%  

**Sec Salary charts in rear of book 52 
Section 2. Hazardous Duty Compensation Effecti\ e and retroactiYe to July I, 1987, in addition to an) other regular or piemium compensation to "hich emplo) ees are entitled, all members of the bargaining unit shall receiie hazardous duty compensation Such hazardous dut:, compensation shall be considered as a part of regular \,·eekly compensation for purposes of O\ertime and holiday pa) and for purposes of sick, injured, vacation, and other authorized leave compensation computation and for pension contribution computation 
First Pay Period July 2008 1.5% 
This section shall be without prejudi~e to the rights or interests of either party, and in the even the Association prevails, after final judicial review, in Suffolk Superior CA No 60048, 60440, 63167, grievance# 16-891, or any other grievance pertaining to the issues contained in these matters, the provisions of this section shall terminate 
Section 2(a).. The department shall establish and conduct a competitive examination process for the appointment of police officers to the position of police officer-detective The process shall consist of (1) a written examination (which shall consist of at least 60% of the total examination mark); and (2) training, education and experience Appointments as a detective shall be made only according to rank by mark aftei the examination process has been completed and the rest1lts thereof published on a list by the Police Commissioner 
Until such time as the Police Commissioner puts into effect the aforementioned process, the existing Article XVII, Section 2(A) shall remain in full force and effect, and will terminate only after the competitive examination process has been completed 
Section 3 Assignment Differential A patrolman, so long, but onl) so long, as assigned to one of the follo,\ ing assignments, upon completion of six (6) rnonti'is of such assigned dut}, shall recei \·e \I eek!), in addition to the sala0 to \I hich he 11 ould othern ise be entitled under this Rule, the sum set against such assignment in the following table: 
Patrolman -Radio Operation S6 00 Patrolman • Intelligence Agent $6 00 Patrolman -Internal Affairs Im estigator S6 00 Patrolman -Staff Inspection Imestigator S6 00 Patrolman · Mounted Patrol Officer S6 00 Patrolman -Canine Officer S6 00 Patrolman -Organized Crime Investigator $6.00 Patrolman -Academj Instructor $6 00 Patrolman -Harbor Patrol Boat Operatm $8 00 Patrolman • Teletype Operator $8 00 Patrolman -Aide to Commissione1 $8 00 Patrolman -Community Service Officer $8 .00 Patrolman -Hackney Carnage Investigator $8 00 Patrolman -Bomb Disposal Squad $40.00 Patrolman • Emergency Service Unit $8 00 Patrolman -In Charge of Police J'.vfethods Section $10 00 Patrolman -Diaftsman $ 10 00 Patrolman -law librarian $10.00 Patrolman -In Charge of Canine Section $10 00 Patrolman -Automobile Investigator $1 O00 Patrolman -Juvenile Officer $10 00 Patrolman -Criminal laboratory Evidence Technician $10 00 Patrolman • Ballistician $10.00 
Patrolman -Fingerprint Evidence Iec'.,nician $10 00 Patrolman -Hospital Liaison Officer $10 .00 Patrolman -Photographer Evidence Technician $10 00 Patrolman • Pol ice Planne1 $10.00 Patrolman -Headquarters Dispatche1 $40 00 Patrnlman -Radio Technician $13 50 Patrolman•· Computer Programmer $13 50 Patrnlrnan • Breathalyzer Technician $13 50 
54 

Patrolman -Li2.ison Officer, Traffic and 
Parking Department $13 50 

Patrolma.-1 -In Charge of Corrc:spondence Section $19 50 
Patrolman -In Charge of Police Listing Section $19 50 
*Patrolman -In Charge ofBallistics Unit S19 50 
*Patrolman -In Charge of Police Im estigation Section, 
District Attorney's Office S19 50 

*Patrolman In Charge ofPolice Reports 
Re,iew Section $19.50 

Patrolman -Field Training Officer SlO 00 
Patrolman -Mobile Operations $6 00 
Section 3(a) Field Training Officer F icld Training Officers shall be subject to the seniority process ofthe agreement Their appointment shall be made in the same manner as an) other title listed in this section However; Field Training Officers must be designated from an existing shift which has already been staffed by seniority A probationary officer will be assigned to the Field Training Officers on a shift which has been staffed by scnio1 ity 
A Field Training Officer shall receive the SIO00 spcciillist rnte as Jong as said officer is designated as a Field Training Officc1 Compensation will commence with the designation of an officer as a Field Ttaining Officer 
Section 4.. Detective An employee who is rated a detective and who is assigned to 
one of the assignments I isted in the preceding Section shall 
receive either his detective differential 01 his assignment pay, whichever is higher, but not both, except that both shal I be paid to persons currently performing the assignments specified with an asterisk in Section 3 of this Article provided, however, that a person receiving the assignment pay sball not lose his rating as a detective Section 5 Uniform and Clothing Allo"ance 
Effocti.e January 2008: increase to S800 
Effective upon ratincation of the Agreement, the City ofBoston and the Boston Police Department shall incur the complete initial cost of all new equipment and clothing required by the Boston Police Department. In the e\ent that the Department requires new pants, shirts (long sleeve and short slee\e), each officer shall be provided \Vith three sets of each 
An ernplo) ee shall retain a record of his expenditures and complete clo!hing imentory form supplied by the City. 

2. Emplo)ees hired at an) time during the calendar ;ear shall be advanced the a!lo1\ance payable for such calendar 1 ear at time of appointment 
3 Uniforms so purchased must conform to Department specifications. 
4. Upon termination of an emplo,ee due to retirement or death, tbe allowance payable for that calendar year will be prorated and paid to him or, in case of his death, his estate in the manner provided by law for the payment of vacation pay on death 01 retirement 
Section 6. Night Shift Differential 
An employee who is regularly scheduled to work on a night shift (any shift or tour commencing at or after 14 PM and prior to 7:30 AM.) shall receive, in addition to his regular weekly salary, a weekly night shift difforential in the amount equal to nine percent (9%) of his base pay plus weekend differential Night shift differential shal[ not be included in base pay for the purpose ofcomputing overtime but shall be so included for the purpose of determining holiday pay, vacation pay, sick and iltjured leave pay, and pay for in-service twining, and shall be considered as regular compensation for 1etircment and pension purposes to the extent permitted by law 
56 

Section 7.. Annual Honorarium Those patrolmen \\ho ha\ e receh ed or \iho \i ill recei\ e the Department Medal of Honor for performing extraordinaD police senice shall recehe a S50 annual honorarium each December so long as the) remain acti\ e members of the Department. 
Section 8.. Weekend Differential In addition to any other regular or premium compensation to which police officers are entitled, all members of the bargaining unit shall receh e the folio,, ing weekend differential to be considered as part of regular weekl) compensation and shall be included in base pa) for the purposes of computing overtime, court time, sick pa), injured pa), holiday pay, vacation pay, paid lunch time, and night differential and shall be considered regular compensation for pension and retirement to the extent permitted by law 
Effective First pay period of.July 2009 0.5% increase 

Section 9. 911 Response Specialist 
In addition to any other regular or premium compensation to which police officers are cntillcd, all members ofthe bargaining unit shall receive the following 911 Response Specialist Rate to be considered as part of regular weekly compensation and shall be included in base pay for the purpose of computing overtime, court time, sick pay, injured pay, holiday pay, vacation pay, paid lunch time, and night differential and shall be considered regular compensation for pension and retirement to the extent permitted by law 
Effective First pay period of .July 2009, 015% increase 

Section 10.. Deferred Compensation Play 
EITcctivc first pay period January 2008, the City shall provide a process for employees to elect to contribute to the deferred compensation plan using a percentage, as specified by the 
57 

emplo1ee, of supplemental income The Cit_1 retains the unilateral right to alter and amend administration of the process in accordance \\ ith applicable Federal and State lm\s, an) 3d part_l administrators' rules and regulations and the: Ci[} 's policies concerning pa) roll changes and deductions 
AR IICLE XVII A EDUCATION INCENTIVE PLAN/ I OSGEVIIY PROGRAM 

The City, the Police Commissioner, and the Association agree that better to assure orderly economic growth of business and industl} in our community and the securit) of life and propeity of all om people, it becomes necessary to establish career incentive programs to advance the entry, production and retention within the Police Dcp;:irtment of qualified and professionalized police officers 
Section I. Education Incentive Plan 
I. Consistent with the terms of the contingency agreement of the parties, contemporaneous with the submission of the cost items of this contract to the Boston City Council pursuant to M G L c l 50E, §7 the mayor shall transmit to the City council an order accepting the provisions of M G L c 4 I, §I 081 (Quinn Bill), and thereafter shall exeit said Mayor's best efforts to procure the passage of said order, provided, however; that in no event shall said 01 det take effect prior to July 5, 2000 and in no event earlier 
2 In the event a legal action is b1ought on behalf of any employee of the Boston Police Department claiming an entitlement to the Quinn Bill benefit on a date cailier than July 5, 2000, economic improvements under this agreement that have not yet been implemented shall be suspended pending the completion of the litigation If the court npholds the Quinn Bill implementation date provided herein, economic improvements herein shall be implemented as of the stated effective date(s) 
58 

3 L1 the event a court of final jurisdiction orders the City to implement the Quinn Bill on a date earlier than fol) 5, 2000, then an) economic irnprO\ ements pro\ ided under this a;,:reement shall not be implemented and the parties shall-immediately commence negotiations in order that the economic benefits provided hereunder shall be relati\el} equhalent to \,hat is agreed to hereunder 
4 In the event that the Quinn Bill is not adopted as provided for in paragraph I above, the parties shall immediate!; commence negotiations in order that the econo~ic benefits provided hereunder shall be relative!) equivalent to what is agreed to hereunder and consistent with the City's (50%) contribution to Quinn 
Bill benefits 
5 Payments made pursuant to M G l c 41, § I 081 shall be included in base pay for purposes of pension/ retirement and overtime pa) only as required by federal law, but not for the purposes of overtime pay paid under provisions of the parties' collective bargaining agreement, holiday pay, detail pay, leave pay, hazard pay, night differential pay or any other pay. 
6 In the event the M.G L e 41, § 1081 is repealed by the General Court and such repeal causes the cessation of reimbursement to the City by the Commonwealth of the Commonwealth's share of the cost of educational incentives paid pursuant to M G L c. 41, § I08 L, then eligible employees shall receive only fifty percent (50%) of the appropriate educational incentive provided byMGL.c41,§I08L 
7 If for any fiscal ycm the reimbmscment from the Commonwealth does not folly meet its fifly peiccnt (50%) share ofeducational incentive paid pmsuant to 
M.G 1 c 41, § 1031, then eligible employees shall subsequently be paid educational incentives equal to 5 0%, IO 0%, or 12 5% based on the degree held and certified, plus the percentage of the remaining 5 0%, JO 0%, or 12 .5% that equals the percent of the Common\\ealth 's share that\\ as actualh reimbursed b, the Commonwealth for the prior fiscal );ear • 
Quinn Bil] pa) ments shall be made on an annual basis on a date certain The date certain shall be in late November or early December of each:, ear 

Section 2. LongeYity Pmgram Effective the first pay period July 200 7, patrol officers that are both on the Department pa:, roll and who have ten (IO) or more years of service, from date of hire with the Department, and less than twenty (20) ) cars of service shall receive t\\ o thousand dol!ars ($2000) annually, where such officers are otherwise not eligible for Quinn Bill benefits 
Effective the first pay period July 2007, patrol officers that are both on the Department pa) roll and who have twenty (20) years of service from date of hire with the Department shall receive four thousand ($4000) annually where such officers are otherwise not eligible for Quinn Bill benefits. Payments under this longevity program shall be made weekly and shall be included in base pay for the purpose ofcomputing overtime, court time, sick pay, inju,ed pay, holiday pay, vacation pay, lunch pay and shall be considered regulm compensation for pension/retirement purposes to the extend permitted by law 
Section 3. All payments under the Plan or Program are annual payments, but they shall be prorated based on tile number of weeks a patrolman is on the payroll in a particulai year 

Section 4 .. 
Those patrolmen who quali[y for payment under both the Plan and the Program shall receive the higher payment to which they are entitled, but not both 

Section 5. 
Patrolmen shall retain their rights under the Plan or the Program so long as, but only so long as, they retain the rnnk of patrolman 
60 

Section 6. Ihe Police Commissioner and the Association's Board of Officers (President, Vice-President, Secretary, and I'reasurer) shall select a committee of outstanding citizens to \\ ork 11 ith them in the further de1elopment of police career incenti,e programs 
(Renumber sections in this Article to be consistent with the changes herein) 
ARIICLE XVIII DURATION OF AGREEMENT 

Section 1 
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Agreement shall take effect as of the date of execution and shall continue in force and effect until superseded by a new Collective Bargaining Agreement 
Section 2. 
Either party shall notify the other of its proposals for a new Agreement any time after nine (9) months prior to the expiration date of this Agreement, and the parties shall proceed forlhwith to negotiate with respect thereto 
61 






JULY2009 POLICE OFFICER SALARY CHARTS 
0) 
r-:, 



i ED'i9CA1"9NAL ASSOCIATE (DAYS)  :  
Base  Shift Diff,  Gross  Hourly  Overtime  Holiday  Uniform  Qurnn  TOTAL ANNUAL  
1st Year  935.92  58.50  994.42  24.86  35.10  248.61  800.00  5,514.07  61.454.72  
2nd Year  1,048.63  65.54  1,114.17  27.85  39.32  278.54  BOO.OD  6,178.07  68,758.76  
3rd Year  1,161.46  72.59  1,234.05  30.85  43.55  308.51  800.00  6,842.80  76,070.84  

0) 
w 

EDU~A~ONAL ASSOCIATE (RIGHTS)  
Base  Shift Diff.  Gross  Hourly  Overtime  Holiday  Uniform  Qumn  TOTAL ANNUAL  
1st Year  935.92  80.67  1,016.59  25.41  35.10  254:15  800.00 ·  5,636.99  62,806.94  
2nd Year  1,048.63  90.36  1,139.01  28.48  39.32  284.75  800.00  6,135.81  70,273.88  
3rd Year  1,161.46  100.10  1,261.56  31.54  43.55  315.39  800.00  6,995.35  77.748.85  

·! 


E~UC~TIONAL BACHELORS (DAYS) 

Shrft
Base 
Gross 

TOTAL
Hourly 
Overtime 
Holiday 

Uniform 
Qumn
Iliff. 

ANNUAL
1st Year 
935.92 
58.50 
994.42 
24.86 
35.10 
248.61 

BOO.OD 
11,028.13 
66,968.78
2nd Year 
1,048.63 
65.54 
1,114.17 
27.85 
39.32 
278.54 

800.00 
12,356.14 
74,936.83
3rd Year 
1,181.46 
72.59 
1,234.05 
30.85 
43.55 
308.51 

800.00 
13,68561 
82,913.65 

' 


CJ) 
(.J"J 

1st Year 2nd Year 3rd Year 

I • 
EDUCAiTl~NAL MASTERS/ JD (NIGHTS) 

Base 
935.92 1,048.63 1,161.46 

Shift Diff. 
80.67 90.36 100.10 
I . 
Gross 
1,016.59 1,139.01 1,261.56 

Hourly 
25.41 28.48 31.54 


Overtfme 
35.10 
39.32 
43.55 
Holiday 
254.15 284.75 315.39 



Uniform 
800,DO· SOD.DO SOD.OD 

TOTAL
Qurnn 


ANNUAL 
71,262.44
14,D92.48 
79,747.59
15,789.52 
88,241.88
17,488.38 
CJ) CJ) 
\ 

LONGEVITY (DAYS) 10 YEARS OF SERVICE
I I Shift

I 
Base 
Gross 

TOTAL
Hourly 
Overtime 
Holiday 

Uniform
Oiff. 

Quinn 
ANNUAL
I10th Year 
1,199.77 
74.99 
1,274.76 
31.87 
44.99 
318.69 

800.00 
0.00 
71.485.44 
i LONG~ (NIGHTS) 10 YEARS OF SERVICE .. Shift
Base 
Gross 
Hourly 

TOTAL
Overtime

j 
Holiday 

Uniform
Diff, 

Quinn 
ANNUAL
I10th Year 
1,199.77 
100.10 
1,299.87 
32.50 
44.99 
324.97 

B00.00 
o.oo 
72,877.82 

LONG~ (DAYS) 20 YEARS OF SERVICE  
Base  Shift Diff,  Gross  Hourly  Overtime  Holiday  Uniform  Qumn  TOTAL ANNUAL  
20th Year  1,238.09  77.38  1,315.47  32.89  46.43  328.87  800.00  0.00  73,742.84  

CJ) 
--..J 

LONGan,Y (NIGHTS} 10 YEARS OF SERVICE I  
Base  Shift Diff,  Gross  Hourly  iOvertime  Holiday  Uniform  Qumn  TOTAL ANNUAL  
20th Year  1,238.09  100.10  1,338.19  33.45  46.43  334.55  800.00  0.00  75,002.67  





