


,.0 ! 
-t 
' 
0 
0 
0 
C) 
---·.
. ,, '•". .· .. 
-. _,,_._ ......­
POLICE BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION 
' 

CONTRACT AGREEMENT 

u 

0 
0 
I. 

Q 

Memorandum Single Page 
May 9, 2003 


-
MEMORANDUM 
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES 

() 
65 Niagara Square, Room I007 City Hall Buffalo, New York 14202 (716) 851-5904 • Fax (716) 851-4968 
Leonard A. Matarese 
Commissioner 
(} 



TO: FILE 

FROM: Leonard A. Matarese 

DATE: 9MAY03
C) RE: Collective Bargaining Agreements/ Police & Fire Unions 


Note that the last written CBA between the City and the Police Benevolent Association dates to 1992. The last written agreement between the City and the Firefighters Union was completed in 1988. Both unions have historically refused to enter in discussions to produce new written agreements. 
Since those dates all amendments to the agreements occurred through the binding arbitration process. The recent negotiated settlements with both unions include a commitment to produce a written agreement between the parties. 
Once we have completed the current budget cycle we will commence work on producing these written agreements. 

0 
0 
II. 
0 


2002 -2007 
-! ~ i;J 
-
f) 
0 


MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT 
0 BETWEEN 

THE CITY OF BUFFALO 
CJ AND 

THE BUFFALO POLICE BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION 
Dated 19 MARCH 2003 




\  
J  
ANTHONY M. MASIELLO. Mayor  ROBERT P. MEEGAN. JR., President  
ROCCO J. OUNA. Commissioner, Police  JOHN J. JUSZKIEWICZ. 1st Vici: Prusidcnl  
LEONARD A. MATARESE, Commissioner, Humun Resource.~  RANDIEJ. JOSEPH. 2nd Vice Presidcm1  
LOUIS R. GIARDINA, Director. Labor Relations  RAYMONO A. FIELDS. Recording Sccrc.irury  
MICHAEL 8. RISMAN, Corporation Counsel  WILLIAM J. MlSZTAL, Treasurer  
SEAN P. BEITER. Allorney  JAMES SCHWAN. Anom,y  




MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE CITY OF BUFFALO AND THE BUFFALO POLICE BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION 

The City of Buffalo ("City") and the Buffalo Police Benevolent Association ("PBA") have reached agreement for a successor collective bargaining agreement: 
1. 
The parties agree to a successor collective bargaining agreement for the period of July I, 2002 to June 30, 2007 and it shall automatically be renewed from year to year thereafter unless either party shall notify the other in writing sixty (60) days prior to the tennination date that it desires to modify this Agreement. 

2. 
The parties agree to implement a one-officer patrol car system as is generally described in the Policy Statement attached hereto. 

3. 
The parties agree to continue and maintain the ten-hour schedule for Police Officers assigned to Patrol with the schedule being: 


Shift I 2400 -1000 hours Shift 2 0600-1600 hours Shift 3 1000 -2000 hours Shift 4 1530 -0130 hours Shift 5 2000 -0600 hours 
The above new ten-hour day schedules apply to the Patrol Division including Traffic and Flex Units. Lieutenants in Patrol will be assigned to the 0600-1600, 1530-0130 and the 2000-0600 shifts. Captains will be assigned to the 1000-2000 and the 2000-0600 shifts. 
Detective Sergeants, Detectives, and personnel assigned to headquarters shall 
have no change in their schedule. 
Shift bidding shall be consistent with the current practice of in house posting for shift and shall be by seniority within the District. 
Overtime call ins for Police Officers in the Patrol Division shall also be by 
District seniority. 
The parties agree that in the absence of an Assistant Chief, the functions and duties performed by that classification can be reassigned elsewhere within the bargaining unit to employees holding the rank of Detective or above. The Assistant Chief classification shall be eliminated only through attrition. 
The parties agree that the Department can reassign Inspectors as Duty Officers. They would be assigned to the 1000-2000 and the 2000-0600 shifts by seniority. 


It is agreed and understood that in the absence of an on duty Inspector, the Senior Captain in Patrol for the I 000-2000 and 2000-0600 shifts shall be responsible for responding to serious incidents outside his/her assigned district until the situation is resolved or he/she is relieved. 

4. Until such time as the number of sworn officers in the Police Department has been reduced to 675: 
(A) 
The City agrees that no PBA bargaining unit member shall be laid off. The reduction in the current number of sworn officers and/or the number of positions within the existing ranks and/or classifications shall be by attrition. 

(B) 
The PBA agrees not to object to the reduction in the size of the force and agrees that the parties have fully and completely bargained over these issues and waives its right, if any, to further bargain over the reduction in the numbers of sworn officers or the impact thereof, and further waive its right, if any, to submit any issues relating to the reduction in the numbers of sworn officers or the implementation and/or impact thereof to Compulsory Interest Arbitration 


It is expressly acknowledged by both parties that the reduction in the number of sworn officers in the Police Department to 675 may not be 
accomplished by June 30, 2007, and the agreements set forth shall 
continue past the expiration of this Agreement until that reduction is 
achieved. 
Once the number of sworn officers in the Police Department has reached 675, the agreements set forth in (A) and (B) above shall terminate, and the parties shall revert to whatever rights they had with respect to these issues 

\ prior to tliis Agreement. 
5. In consideration of this Agreement, the PBA shall withdraw its pending Petition for Compulsory Interest Arbitration regarding the impact of the prior layoffs. The PBA shall withdraw its Declaration of Impasse regarding the contract period subsequent to June 30, 2002. The Union agrees that the parties have fully and completely bargained over the implementation and impact of the matters and subjects of this Agreement and the Union waives any right to further bargain over the "i'mpiementation and/or impact of these matters and subjects or the impact thereof, and further waives the right to submit any issues relating to the implementation and/or impact of these matters and subjects to Compulsory Interest Arbitration. IL is agreed and understood that the Union has not waived its right to grieve disputes arising under this Agreement and to submit such disputes to arbitration under. the grievance and arbitration procedure set forth in the 
collective bargaining agreement. 
f} 


6. 
It is agreed that no officer shall be reduced in rank or classification as a result of the reduction in the size of the force agreed to as part of this Agreement. 

7. 
The parties agree to compile a successor written collective bargaining agreement incorporating agreements reached since the July !, 1986 to June 30, 1988 CBA as well as since issued compulsory interest arbitration awards by April I, 2005. 

8. 
In recognition of the significant improvements in productivity resulting from this Agreement, particularly the implementation of one officer cars, the alteration of shift starting times, civilianization of certain positions, and the ability to utilize exempt positions in command of the Districts, the City agrees to a retroactive $5,000 across the board increase in base wages or salaries effective July I, 2002. 

9. 
In addition to the foregoing, the following salary or wage adjustments shall be implemented: 


Effective . Percentage Increase 
7/1/03 3.4% 
7/1/04 3.4% 


7/1/05 3.4% 
7/1/06 3.4% 

10. The City agrees that it will not make any reductions in the rank of Detectives until all Detectives demoted on July I, 2002 have been re-appointed and/or their right to re-appointment based on the existing preferred list expires. 
The City agrees that it will not make reductions in the ranks of Captain and Lieutenant until the current vacancies for those ranks (I for Captain, 2 for Lieutenant) have been filled by permanent appointment within thirty (30) days 
from Common Council approval and PBA ratification. 
\ 
; 
The City agrees that it will not make reductions in the rank of Police Officer until 
the four Police Officers currently working for the Erie County Sheriffs 
Department are recalled. These officers shall be recalled within fourteen ( 14) 
days of the Common Council approval and PBA ratification of this Agreement. 

11. During the term of this Agreement, the City agrees to maintain a minimum number of officers for each rank as is set forth in Appendix A. The City shall, at all times, employ amin.im.um of450 Poiice Officers. 1n the eve.nt the-minim~m for a rank position falls below the stated minimum, the vacancy shall be filled within 45 days of the created vacancy. It is agreed that individuals hired as Police Officers, who are either academy cadets or who are awaiting assignment to the academy shall be included in the number of Police Officers employed by the City for the purpose of this section. 


12.  In consideration of the productivity improvements generated by this Agreement  
and the significant changes in departmental operations that will result from this  
Agreement, the City agrees to reimburse the PBA during the term of this  
'.)  Agreement for its actual, out-of-pocket expenses incurred for the operation of the "On-Duty Emergency Legal Assistance Program". It is agreed and understood  
that this Program covers legal assistance in connection with an initial statement  
and consultation in the event that an individual is injured or killed by the actions  
of an officer, on duty, in the perfonnance of his/her duty. It does not include a  
criminal defense. The PBA shall submit documentation of its actual, out-of­ 
pocket expenses as received to the Commissioner of Human Resources, and the  
reimbursement payment to the PBA shall be made within 45 days.  
13.  The parties mutually recognize that there may, from time to time, be need to  
adjust manpower levels in response to announced retirements. From July I, 2003  
to June 30, 2007, the City shall have the right to review and adjust manpower levels semi-annually on July 15th and January 15th due to reductions in manpower  
caused by retirements. Thereafter, the City shall have the right to review and  
adjust manpower levels annually.  
14.  It is agreed that the photographer, property office, court liaison, quartermaster,  
and public information officer positions may be civilianized by attrition. It is  
further agreed that the City shall have the right to assign the work of transporting  
prisoners to and from the cell block to the Erie County Sheriffs Department.  
'. )  . 15.  It is agreed that the City shall have the right to utilize an exempt, non-union position (Chief or Commander or alternative title) as District or Division  
Commander to be taken from the Lieutenant or above ranks.  
16.  During the period of this Agreement the City agrees not to merge or consolidate  
the Buffalo Police Department with the Erie County Sheriffs Department without  
the PBA's written consent. With the consent of the PBA, the City shall have the  
right to transfer limited duties or activities to the Erie Couniy Sheriffs  
Department or other law enforcement agencies in order to achieve the reduction in  
force described in the above paragraphs. This provision shall terminate at  
midnight on June 30, 2007, and shall not continue in effect past that date,  
regardless of whether a successor agreement or Compulsory Interest Arbitration  
Award is in place. The parties shall revert to whatever rights they had with  
respect to these issues prior to this Agreement.  
17.  The parties recognize that, from time, to time disputes may arise as a result of the  
implementation and application of this Agreement. The parties agree to  
expeditiously resolve said disputes. To do so, the parties agree to formulate a  
committee comprised of an equal number of City and PBA representatives.  In  
addition, the Commissioner of Human Resources shall act as a non-voting Chair  
of the committee. The committee shall be charged with the responsibility to  


attempt to resolve all disputes at the lowest possible level. Nothing shall preclude the parties from also utilizing the grievance/ arbitration procedures. 

18. The parties acknowledge that the City is currently unable to fund the initial costs associated with this Agreement without assistance from the State of New York, the County of Erie and/or the United States Government, and this agreement is contingent upon receipt of such assistance by May 31, 2003. The parties agree to aggressively work together to obtain such funding. Both parties recognize the benefits this Agreement will provide to the residents of the City of Buffalo, and to 
() 
the members of the Buffalo Police Department. 

19. This Agreement is subject to approval of the Common Council and PBA membership ratification. 
CJ 

FOR THE CITY FORTHEPBA 


• 

RESOURCE~ ( 
Date . 0, \\ \'?:a 
APPROVED AS TO FORM 

CORPORATJON iUNSEL 
Date: '3 IJ 9d7 
) 
) 


APPENDIX A 
'.) 

Title / Classification Minimum Permanent Positions 
Police Officer 450 
() 
Detectives 85 Photographer 0 
'.) Detective Sergeant 0 Lieutenants 90 Assistant Chiefs 0 
~) < ') 
Captains 18 Inspectors 2 

BUFFALO POLICE DEPARTMENT 
PATROL UNITS CALL FOR SERVICE RESPONSE POLICY 

0 One-officer vehicles/units have always been a feature within the Buffalo Police Department. Historically, and to this day, supervisors, traffic cars, motorcycles, radar, K-9, AIU, bicycle patrols, etc, operate with only one person in the vehicle. Traditional areas of operation for these vehicles have been traffic control, fire duty, accident calls, cover calls, crossing details, funeral escorts, report taking, tagging, etc. These duties 
() can be expanded to increase operational efficiency without jeopardizing officer safety. 
The Police Commissioner, or the Commissioner's designee shall determine when and where one-officer units and two-officer units are assigned. 
'.) The Department has taken various steps to ensure Officer safety in support of the one­officer manned vehicle: 
• 
A policy is in effect for officers receiving 911 calls to call on scene and to call back in service upon completing the call. The Radio Dispatcher is required to monitor calls and obtain a status report from officers who have been out of service on a call. 

• 
Training in the effective use of Chemical Agent Projectile (CAP) Spray has been and is made available, as well as the spray itself, to all patrol personnel. 



• Patrol vehicles are equipped with Mobil Computer Terminals in which officers · ) have been trained in procedures to call in at scene. 
• All personnel have been equipped with bulletproof vests and portable radios. · 
One-officer units may be designated primary responders to answer calls without limitation, with CAD being programmed to dispatch such. CAD will also be programmed l to assign two one-officer units to selected calls. See attached CAD call types designating 1 unit and 2 (1 unit) or 1 (2 unit) responders. 
Responsibility of Radio Units 
A. A radio unit shall mean any member or members of the Patrol Division who have been assigned to a mobile patrol unit and whose primary responsibility is res_ponding to csi.lls for service. 
B. Upon receipt of a call by a broadcast (i.e. either by MCT or police radio) from the Radio Dispatcher, the unit shall immediately acknowledge receipt of that call. All units shall acknowledge the call by use of the voice radio and MCT. All calls must be acknowledged within one minute from the time they were originally transmitted. 
C. After receipt of the call, the unit shall immediately proceed by the most direct route, to the location of that call. As soon as the unit arrives at the location, the arrival will be acknowledged by using the MCT. 

PATROL UNITS CALL FOR SERVICE RESPONSE POLICY 
Page 2 of 4 

D. The unit will not leave the patrol vehicle without first advising Radio Dispatch of his or her exact location, and a brief report, (i.e.) registration number of any vehicle involved, occupants, anticipated length of time out of the vehicle, etc. He or she will not leave the vehicle until acknowledgement has been received from the Radio Dispatcher. While at the scene, the unit shall take appropriate police action. 
E. For designated calls requiring two one-unit responders, the first unit on the scene will exercise extreme caution and will give the radio dispatcher a preliminary assessment from a safe distance of the circumstances (e.g. fake call, additional assistance required, ambulance needed, etc.). The backup officer will work as the partner to the officer originally responding to the call. The backup officer will remain at the scene only until his presence is no longer needed at which time he/she will call back into service. The initial unit assigned the call by the Dispatcher will be responsible for taking all appropriate police action following this initial assessment. 
F. Upon completion of the call, the unit shall immediately notify the Radio Dispatcher and enter the call's disposition through the MCT. Units must notify the Radio Dispatcher that they have either completed the call or that additional time 

is required. 

G. Units shall maintain a complete, legible Radio Log Sheet (P-1124), recording the time a call was received, the type of call, the time of arrival on scene, the time the call was completed, and the disposition of each call. The contents of each simulcast shall also be recorded on the Radio Log. · 
H. Units must respond to all transmissions from the Radio Dispatcher whether or not they are currently handling a call for service. A unit may be required to leave a call of lower priority in which they are currently involved in order to respond to a higher priority call. 
I. Units shall not leave their assigned area of patrol during their tour of duty unless they are involved in police business, have first obtained permission of a superior officer and they have notified the Radio Dispatcher. 
J. Units must inform the Radio Dispatcher whenever they leave their mobile patrol unit. 
K. Units not assigned to a particular call and who are in close proximity may assist the unit to which the call was assigned, but only after informing the Radio Dispatcher. 
L. For crimes in progress calls, responding units shall coordinate their response through the use offfie poik:e radfo and or the MCT. tlie backup officer wffl work as the partner to the officer originally assigned the call. The officer will remain at the scene only until his presence is no longer required. The backup officer will then clear the scene and join in the search of the area for the suspect. 

) 

J 


PATROL UNITS CALL FOR SERVICE RESPONSE POLICY 
Page 3 of 4 

Supervisory Responsibilities 
A. Patrol Lieutenants in command of a work shift shall continuously monitor the police radio and respond to, and assume command of, all serious incidents, including car and foot pursuits. 
B. Patrol Lieutenants will be responsible for the safety and actions of their employees and direct accordingly while notifying Radio Dispatch. 
C. Patrol Lieutenants will monitor radio communications and the status of officers out of seNice and correct deficiencies within their own command. 
D. Patrol Lieutenants will monitor calls for service and backlogs in their respective districts via MCT and consider redeployment of sector units within their district 

Radio Dispatcher Responsibilities 
A. A patrol unit will not be dispatched to a call designated for 2 units until a second unit is available. 
8. The Patrol Lieutenant must be advised when units are sent to a radio call requesting two units, and acknowledgment must be received. 
C. The Radio Dispatcher must monitor to ensure that patrol units advise the Radio Dispatcher of their exact location at all times when leaving the patrol vehicle and the reason for leaving. 
D. In all circumstances, where any doubt whatsoever exists as to the nature of the call (i.e., unknown trouble), two patrol units must be dispatched. 
E. For crimes in progress calls, the dispatcher will give the units responding to the call air priority in order for the responding officers to coordinate their response. 
911 Lieutenant Responsibilities 
A. The 911 Lieutenant will monitor all radio calls and ensure that proper procedures are being followed by the Radio Dispatchers. 
Single Unitlmplementation Pl1;1n 


Training 
A. The Inspector, Captains, Lieutenants and designated patrol officers from ttie first district where one-officer units will first be implemented will be sent to the City of Rochester to receive familiarity training with one-officer units. One-officer 1Units have been in existence in Rochester since 1978. 
B. Radio Dispatchers will also be sent to Rochester to be trained in dispatching to 
-i-... 1-........ .;~ ... 



PATROL UNITS CALL FOR SERVICE RESPONSE POLICY 
Page 4 of 4 

C. All remaining patrol districts will receive familiarity training from already trained personnel assigned to the districts where single units have been implemented. 
D. All Patrol Officers will be trained in the proper techniques for vehicle stops. This training will be through video instruction offered via the Law Enforcement Resource Center (Vehicle Stops and Officer Safety). 
E. Shotgun training will be provided to all patrol officers. 

Implementation 
A. B District will be the first district where one-officer units are to be utilized. The district will phase one-officer patrol units into the district until the entire district is equipped with all one-officer patrol units. This process will take up to sixty days. 
B. The next district where one-officer patrol units will be implemented (to be determined) will follow the same process as the B District. However, before any officer is assigned to a single unit, he/she will receive on the job training in B District. 

C. Each of the remaining districts will also follow the same process initiated in B District and officers will be trained in those districts that now have single units. 

Steering Committee 
A. Throughout the implementation process, a steering committee comprised of Police Department managers, union representatives, government officials, (i.e. Council members), community representatives, participating key personnel such as, a 911 Lieutenant, Radio Dispatcher, District Patrol Captain, Lieutenant, Inspector, etc. This committee will meet at least bi-weekly and will evaluate the implementation process, and will make changes and recommendations when 
necessary. 

'.) I' I 

State ofNew York 
Public Employment Relations Board 






----------~-------Opinion and Award 

In the Matter ofthe Interest Arbitration between P,,ERB Case No. Buffalo Police Benevolent Association · IA201-003;:Mzoo~238 0 .:-,-Petitioner ;· -and~ 
Before: The· Public Arbitration Panel '!, :\': . S.umner Shapiro, Public·Member and Chaiiperson EdwardfG. Piwowarczyk, Esq, Public EntpioyerIMeniber 11.obert'P.; ·Meegan, Jr.;"Employee Org'aniza,uori M'eiiiber ;:


•t1: ..:. :;;:.~!. \i." .. ~ · · . ;-.. -. ~!:'; ,·.,;rt~·.,(¾ 
t·:; .,t_~_/..:l·t.!f.·:~: _:1.-:._
-~-~.. 

· Panel designated by ·the:iNe'w York State Public En1ploy.ti:l~Jit,\R'elatiohs · •,; .-• ·• Board (PERB), pursuant to Civil Service Law Section 209.41,on-July 17; 

· 2001. The ·petition.et is the Buffalo Police Benevolent Associa,tion;' hereinafter referred· to variously as -"the PBA",. "the ·Employees",· "the 
) Union", "the Officers" or "the Petitioner". The respondent is the -City of· Buffalo, New York, hereinafter referred to variously as "the Employer", "the·. City", "Buffalo", or ~•,the Respondent." The PBA and the City were parties• to a CoI!ective Bargaining Agreement (CBA) the term of whi.ch expired oil 
. l June 30, 2000. Th_e parties entered into negotiations for a successdr agreement on October 23, 2000 and following a number of .unfruitful 
. negotiating sessions, filed a joint Declaration of Impasse. On December 6, 2000, PERB designated a mediator who conducted an unfruitful mediation session between the parties on January 12, 2001. The parties determined that further mediation sessions were unlikely to be productive and the PBA petitioned for Compulsory Interest Arbitration on April o, 2001. On July 17, 2001, PERB, over the signature of Richard A. Curreri, Director of Conciliation designated the Public Arbitration Panel in this matter. T4_e 7,0 panel's jurisdiction is for tvvo contract years; namely, July I, 200QJht'0uti? June 30, 2001 which is referred to hereinafte~ as '.'Year l" or (W:ii\~st y~a(ioic~ 
and July 1, 2001 through June 30, 2002 wluch 1s referred to ~~~r~a:R>J':l 


2 

"Year 2" or "the second year". As the Award in this matter will issue after the close ofthe second year there is need to refer to the next succeeding year . even though that year falls beyond the panel's purview and the scope ofthe record before· it. When such reference is made, that succeeding year is referred to as "Year 3" or "the third year". :~,  
0  Civil Service Law, Section 209.4 (v) directs the paneI·as fo1lows::  
0  (v) the Public Arbitration panel shall make a just ·anireasonable deten;nination ofthe matters in dispute. In arriving at such determination, the panel shall specify the :basis_ for its ~dings, talcing intclconsideration, in addition to any either relevailt·fa.ctors, the followfog: · ··  
0  a. comparison of the wages, hours and conditions :6f employment of the Employees involved in the arbitration•proceeding withrwages; hours, and -conditions ofempl_oymeht ofother empfoyee.s'perfornung J"iimilatiservices or ·requfring similar sltjfls1tilider similar working conditio!rs and,i"wi'th other· . employees gene:ially in: public and private employment in comparable · 'communities; ·_: . ::-,. .·. . .:_ .. '. '.. ·. .:...-; ;.·. ·'·  :·  -.,-·  



.b.-the interest·and,welfate ofthe public and th'e fin:aticial'ahility' of.the:: : . ,;_: .. publicemploye.rt6pay;'.:· ._,_.,,_ '' :·;•.+ .:-·:•·!'·'' · ··,• 

c. 
comparison ofpeculiarities in regard to other trades ofprofessib:O.s; · including specifically, (1) hazards of employment; (2) physical , qu~i:fications; (3) educational qualifications; (4) mental qualifications; (5) .·· job training and skills; 

d. 
the terms ofcollective,agreements negotiated between the parties in· the past providing for compep.sation and fringe benefits, including, but not limited to, the provisions for salary, insurance and retirement . benefits, medical and hospitalization benefits, pailtirrie off and job security. ·· · 


The panel conducted hearings at the Hyatt Regency-Hotel in Buffalo, New York on November 7 and 8, 2001, November 8, 2001; December 4, 2001, February 12 and 13, 2002, and March 19, 2002 at which time the parties were afforded unfettered opportunity to prevent testimonial and documentary evidence, to examine and cross-examine witness, and to offer arguments in support of their respective positions. At the close of the hearing the parties opted to exchange and :file post hearing briefs on or before May 6, 2002 which day was subsequently briefly extended by mutual 

() 
3 
consent, whereupon the .briefs were timely filed. The Panel-met in executive session at the Radisson Suite Hotel Buffalo on July 25, 2002. 


Appearances were as follows: 
ForthePBA 

o. 
James W. Schwan, Esq. Schwan, Sammaxcci' & Sammarco Buffalo, New York. 

() 
Edward Fennel Wynantskill, New York 
John Juszkiewicz ;:,, . D..­Police Officer, Bu$.lo Police·Department'-. 



,RaymondFields -:•', ,,,:.:;_,.::'!'--,,. ._,;_,_,.•,,·:PBA,:Witness PatrolOfficer; Bu:ffirlo PolfoeDepartmenf··•:-, · · · ·. 



Randie Joseph Lieutenant, Buffalo Police Department 
For. the City 
Sean P. Beiter, Esq, 
i ) Jaeckle, Fleischman & Mugel, LLP Buffalo, New York_ 
Anthony Masiello Mayor, City ofBuffalo, New York 
·James Milroy Director of Budget and Management City ofBuffalo, New York 
-__)· 
\ ) 
\ ' 
PBACounseI 
Finance Consultant : PBA Witness 
f~:: 
.f.• fr·'! v-,PBA Witness 11 •·....,
..... 
PBA Witness 
Employer Counsel 
City Witness City Witness 


\ Ann Forti.Scian·ino I City Accountant and · Deputy Comptroller, City ofBuffalo 
Kathleen O'Hara Co:qnnissioner o;fHuman Resources 

0 
City ofBuffalo 
Susan Wheatley Assistant Corporation• Counsel City. ofBuffalo

0 
Matthew Van Vessem Assistant Corporation:Counsel City ofBuffalo ;:,; · 
0 


. Rocco Diina i/.c . Police Commissitmeif'.• City ofBuffalo· >. · : " 
4 
City Witness 
City Witness 
City Witness 
· City Witness li 
:r. 
l •.. 




.·· :The parties jointly sttbmitted'·20Exh'ibits artd' in conjµnctkin \Vlth · · ,, •c ·.. '' ' ·,:,; 
..· the testimony ofwitnesses the PBA submitted 13, an.d tlicrCifY'submitteil'). ·,, · 15 Exhibits. All were· admitted without objection and as they·are thoroughly· identified in the transcripts, we· omit a redundant listing here. 
· II. Background . . In its petition for Compulsory Interest Arbitration the PBA presented 23 . proposals, the first ~d· probably most significant one of which (PBA Proposal I) was a proposal for salary increases ofnot less than 6 percent to 
be increased if the CPI plus 2 percent exceeded 6 percent in. a particular year. The proposed salary adjustment formula ·was the same for both the first and second year. A number of other proposals were very significant 
and along with the Salary issue are discussed subsequently herein. The City, in its response to the petition, dated May 22, 2001, stipulated that it did not agree to any of the PBA proposals, and was in tum proposing 14 modifications. With respect to the PBA's Salaries and Hours of Work proposal it counter proposed (City Proposal 5) wage increases of2.5 percent in each ofthe two years. Subsequently, on October 4, 2001, the City filed an amended response modifying its Proposal No. 5 now proposing that no wage increase be forthcoming in either ofthe two years. ' 
5 


PBA Proposal 5 wherein the Union sought to amend Article XI. Settlement of Disputes, Section 11.1 was subsequently held to be a nonmandatory subject. 
Both parties here involved are experienced in pursuing their options through · 

a 
Compulsory Interest Arbitration: Their last written and neg1tiated '-CBA terminated on June 30"1988 and since then six successor agreements-have been implemented --two through Memoranda of Agreement an& four through Arbitration. Historically, the PBA's central thesis was that its members were being d.enied benefits and rewards•being receiv~d by fellow officers in comparable:furisdictions which represent the true ancf! fair market value of Buffalo PBA Tu.embers' services. The City, though cha/lenging the reliability ··of some Union :statistics, hasbconsistently · em~hasized its precariousi :fiscal positibn constraining its ability to pay. : rn;1i'the present 

C) matter, these same aspiration( and argu.ments::contfuued to, pre:i!ail ani:J. ·this docilmentj,relimtt,iarilt focusei; '.\:m the, salmt-'and;-;hea:Itlt insu~ce·i~su~s. 
)'

We: summarize :fiill:ling's'and-ratidnale relating'li-6 the:•other issuesiwith' specral . emphasis ·on those:of gieatet slgn,ficaii:ce 'in· ii'subsequehtsdctiollt.'L. :. .;,;:,.,: ~ ·, 

111·,.~Positions of,ffte. P!i.rties < · · · :·,' :.:.: !". i, ,·.,;,i •: 5: ·,:t t ?{t:, ·-'··. ·. · ·•· 



·. A PBA Position on Salar,(~dHealth Rel_ated:Insu_rance'lssues ··., ·: :· ,..,, • ' · !' ·: ·' 
The Union asserts tlie established comparable jurisdictions relied upon· in past compulsory interest arbitrations are· three contiguous towns namely; Amh(irst, Cheektowaga, and Tonawanda. All three are not only contiguous to Buffalo but also constitute the three largest towns in Erie County.· The Employees offer a comparison on a "monetary" · basis; i.e.; .a basis which .iricludes longevity pay, shift differentittls, sick incentives, holiday pay, shooting incentives_ and the like on both an annual compensation and p<:il' hour rate basis. They assert Buffalo officers, on an annual monetary basis, · fall short of the average of the comparable communities by 9.7 percent, 9.3 percent, and 9 percent, at the 5, 10, and 15 year longevity levels. On an hourly basis they claim these differentials drop to 8.1 percent, 5.7 percent, and 6.6 percent, respectively, at the same longevity levels. The Union furthe:r emphasizes that these comparisons exclude unifonn allowances wherein the $100 per year compensation paid its members fall short of the average comparable communities by nominally $1000 per annum. Additionally, the PBA asserts, since their members are paid less than their collea,,,crues in the contiguous comparable communities they also receive 
() 
6 


) relatively inferior retirement penefi.ts. Moreover, it asserts the I disadvantageous Buffalo position is exacerbated for its Tier II' employees 

(employees hired after July 1, 1973) as Buffalo does not provide the one year .final average salary option for its retirees as do both Cheektowaga ·and Tonawanda. The one year final average option would effect raises in Buffalo 
,retirement pensions :by 8,perce~t, , . ... ::: , .. : , .:;,< 
The· Employee's seek (PBA Proposal 1) an across the board increase equivalent to the increase in a previous year's Consumer Price Index (CPI) all urban consumers.series plus 2 percent or' a total of6 percent, whichever is higher in each ofthe twc\iyears.-With the benefit ofhindsight, the proposed across the board increase;is 6 percent in each oftlie two years. 
The PBA is seeking two'signiffoant improvements in·Health,Insurance. The first relates to officers who retired since July 1'p'.1986>with 20. or more years ofBuffalo department sft'rvice Of those -who hav.'e taken disability,tetirerr,tent 

· resulting from line e.f duty injuries.,, 'Ehe~ fr-etirees:, reqeive , • paid . ·.· heiiltij/hospitalizatioil infu:iran~.;but do ,not reeewe majcir medicaf;coveiaige, . :, · · and the, drug• rider'·erititl4ig thenito' prescriptirur'dtugs with a,$5 ge:nericr•and ·. . ·, ,_: ·.,,, 
$10 brand name co-pay obligatiqn. P$A: Proposal 14; calis· for the Cify'.to 

·' pto'viqfpaid· majof,medil'ial cl)verage and. all e:iristirig,iriders:upon'.iretiiehient; '·. ·;·, ·. -, ·;y '.fhe Union seeks· to 1ustify this' proposal ion: the ;basis thatit·is pttivided m:·;' comparable employment m ·the. _To'!{ns ·o( ·A:mhers~· ·Cheektowaga: ·and' ·· ,;,-: 
•Tonawanda. · 
The ·second health/hospitalization related proposal (PBA Proposal 15) is for the City to upgrade its present GHI Spectrum t Plan dental coverage to GHI Preferred Plus dental coverage. It bases this proposal on a claim that there are·Iess than 30 participa:ting·dentists providing servi9e under.the Spectrum 
) Plan when there are in excess of300 dentists accepting patients covered by the GHI Preferred dental coverage. As GHI Spectrum is being phased out in fa'vor of its Preferred Plus program, the .Union pleads the replacement is necessary 
The Union challenges the validity ofthe Employer's claim that it is burdened by a severe .inability to pay which absolutely supports a determination that no wage increase should be forthcoming in either the first or second year. The PBA asserts that Buffalo entered the first year of our concern in very sound fiscal condition. Its unreserved general fund balance as of June 30, 2000 was nominally $15.5 million which represented an improvement of nominally $1.4 million over the fund balance at the conclusion of the 
-
0 
7 

\ 
preceding year on June 30, 1999. In that preceding year the Union notes that 
I 
its members received a base pay increase of 3 percent and significant improve~ents in longevity pay. The base pay increase induced a further cost increase in certain pay benefits like holiday pay, overtime pay, and . court pay among others. The City, it contends,.was not only able tti'absorb the incurred increased bosfs•in the:.,,1999 -200.0 contract:year,.but in:i~dition 
0 
accumulated a nominal $1.4 million :fimd balance increase.· M&reover, during that· year, the Buffalo Board of Education revenues ·eiceeded expenditures by nominally $8.85 million and its accrued surplus suipasse.d. : th.e City's. Finally, as of'.June 30, 2000, the Union notes no prin(lipal or interest on City indebtedness was past due, and that since then none has become past due and Buffalo has never. de.faulted on the payment of principal or interest on any)ndebted_ness. +, · , . 
Buffalo,c;the Union urges, :Was clearly .on·:tiscallyi•sound ground as'.tof June 30, 200Chwith its comb.i.o,ed;Gener,al fund and Board of;Education ftfods and ·: ·worling:i:;apital having im:tfrovedfin;teach,of:the:(p.t;eceding.-fiv~. fis<ml yeahi, (,.. ending -June 3.0; 2000/ Sp.ecific;ally;; it offers1.that:,on ·June.3.;<.d9Slo assets·:>" · ·,,­


•·t· ·-,, . ·-· m
exeeedediliabilitiell by-15 .2•.'percenfwhereas :011 lWie 30,(2000 •the e:ig:i~ss ha:d-, ··, :;, ,·: i () f.·•.-).>:.· _· r · ·nsen'to-37i-percent ·:' ,. · 'i-. :··• ·.-:··?C:: ·, ,-,'.,: ·:•, . ;. 
· in reality, substantia1 surpluses evolved. -~ For the first year of our · jurisdiction, July 1, 2000 through June 30,2001, the PBA reports that tlie City had projected ending. with a nominal $3 million surplus whereas, in fact, it ended the year with an undesignated fund balance of nominally $9. 7 
· million or approximately $7,. million mote.· than it had conservatively _estimated. In that year the City expenditures fell nominally $.8.9 million under budget while ·its revenues fell short by only $2.7 million creating a budgetary surplus of nominally $6.3 million. The PBA contends the City had set aside in the first year budget, funding to provide a 3 percent across the board increase to the PBA and that in keeping with generally accepted accounting practices, that funding is treated as already exp~nded in the financial statements and that there is therefore no justification • for withholding payment ofthe fully funded 3 percent across the board increase, and urges the panel to award same. 

The Union focuses on the cash flm,v aspect of the City's position. It notes tfrnt at the commencement of the second year, the City was in possession of nominally $109 million in cash coming from the proceeds ofa $120 miI!ion 


-
8 


RAN issue, state. and federal aid, sales tax receipts, real property tax receipts, and other receipts balance against nominally $130 million in cash 


disbursements. In the Union view, Buffalo should have had enough cash to last for several months, yet; .by October, it was claiming it would run,out of money by the end ofNoveniber, 2001. This,.the Union notes, did not:occur ·• and• it cites· the City's demeanor. as yet. ,.•another: example.:,.of the, City.

0 
promoting an unwarranted image ofpoverty,when negotiations are pending 
or in progress. 
Buffalo, the Union asserts, in the fiscal year ending June 30, 2001 realized 

0 accumulated fund balances for both the City an1 School District exceeding· expectations. The initial p119jected budget deficit for the second year was; the Union acknowledges, $31 million. However :it notes that ·a .$5 :million, reduction was obtained through reductions in retirement system costs and­further reductions were accomplished by spending freezes; . layd:ffs of · 
() seasonal·and terilpo:raryiwor.kers, the closing offire:rcompanies·on a retatingrt:­.. ,,·, · .:· · basis,.::and,avoidanpe of,ovetrtime and similar -acti~n0' By!ithe time ofthe last'!, -.. . '" -.· ..&L :-. hearing in,the presentproced.ure;the:,U.niorr,emphasizes,,the.;deficit hatl beeni·.~:) .,::.. ·,.,,:,·•. · ·· -reduced ;to';$4,3 mil.lion.-Th-qs irt-a{span oflihie months;" llie Empldyer him>-,:; 0: ./i · } . reduced its projected deficit-from $31 million-toiless tlian:$5-,.inillion. The'.··.; PBA lirges:tha:t the projected deficit has already: taken> into accouriti!across. '. ,: · · ··· ·.· the board .siilary inereases for bargaining 'units,tha.fhave, not settled.-= ;These,. ,:. ,. ·•. ·: .-: :: ,: · . . monies: have been: set aside as though they'.had;;alrea:dy--been, spent and they·,,,. · · · ·, ,. ·· · include at least a 2.5 percent across the.. boaa;d iincrease according to the·. · testimony of the City's Budget Director·.and. possibly 3 percent in the · testimony ofthe PBA's financial expert. Hence, an· Award providing for a minimum of a 2.5 percent' and possibly as. much as a 3. percent across the board-increase in each oftwo years wili it is 'ur.ged, not adversely affect the residual projected deficit. 
The Union further prop(?ses that projected budget shortfalls are not unknown in Buffalo. In 1994, it attributes to the current mayor a warning of a $31 million deficit only to have the fiscal year end with a nominal $6.25 million surplus. In a fiscal years ending June 30, 1996, 1997, 1998, 2000 and 2001 there were similar budgetary surpluses though in the :fiscal year ending June 30, 1999 there was a small operating deficit. The Union sees nq reason _to expect that the City will not end the second fiscal year in the black. It notes that in the first year the City Tax levying margin was nominally $20 million but that in each year since the _.fiscal year ending June 30 1997, the homestead tax rate has decreased and is now less than it was in 1997. The PBA further contends the City, in the past year, made a $22 million one-time 
() 
9 


·,, contribution to settle litigation involving the Board of Education. It w:ill not be required to make such extraordinary one-time payments in the second fiscal year and it cites a pronouncement by the Commissioner of Police that the department is expected to complete the fiscal year $4 million under budget A further source of;p.otentii:µ revenue; according .to the -Unio:rn lies ­

· -in--the\retixement;and r:ecr.uitini:,nt P+ograms, : :As officers retire they a:rie not .-·
o' 
,being replaced and their du.ties are .being assumed by the.\ .ierniilning :, complement. -Th.is imposes\i.additional work burdens on the remaining officers and leaves undisburs¢, money-which would have been·exp~nded as salaries.had the retired officers :Temained on active-duty, providi,ng at once justification, for improv1;1d compensation and the· means. with whicb to 


pay for same. ,,~, ·· · :r 
':' The Union·-:supports its·· optimistic, forecast for closing ;the second,-ii"}'ear . ·<t,• budget gap :and generating an(;actual"::surplus :in the ·course ,.of the .fiscahiyear 
O . _ ... Jt'' . . . ,.l!l "' by assertingilltat .the.central buainess?.districtv.acancj;rate hits been,·relatively i' 11 .. '"·"":' :stable,since\119911~ increm~n:tal,v,Qai;i.cy rateim.pi(l\vem.i,nt;,since '19~?:/4. It,-,1,, ,', : ,fr •;;·.i:~,--.i quotes ..~xtensivel;sr, · from·rthei0fficial~ Bond,t:Statement dated'! Feb.ruar.§6. 26•;;)it-• :; 
, ,·••' •;\~, _ ·: :. 71.!nl •'.• 200ii-.,,whiehi enumerates' vl;\iious,,';p'roje.cts}t S0lll:erhef · whitrh ::,have!~~been, ·::','' :, ·:_,, "]::,• i O (/-J ) , -/c .-_ c~:>1ri:pleted :and oth~s,?f which -~re uildew,~y:·;or: -~•'.px;i)spect,.~ainlmg a,.,.i . •. , •i: : 1. /' ·· ·, ;_; ',., · --.· picture -0f a,bµrgeonmg:,urbarrrrena.tssanc~: and 1ts.llllplic1t-1salu:tary nnpa:ct om,·,·::-: , ;c-:. ,I,. :•iii' :---·::<;_, ;,Buff'alo1s tax·-:base. ·•.· :,, · \·, . 1 '.: ·:.!Ji),.;:,, ·;LY·:,·,:; ,-.,·. · • · 



B. GityPosition on Salary and Health-Related.Issues , : 
The City in reviewing its budgeting procedures -relating to salaries informs "that though it had.proposed a 2 1/2 percent wage1increase for both year. one .. and year two that it actually set aside money to· ft1nd an award or negotiated:· raises in the range of 3 percent for the,:first year and 2.5 percent .for the second:year. It notes, however, that the City was prepared to settle for these amounts on. the basis of two assumptions; namely, (I) that _sufficient State Aid wotild be forthcoming and (2) that Buffalo would obtain adequate health insurance concessions in return. The City offers that in the wake of the disaster of September 1 I, 2001, its State Aid anticipations were drastically altered and it found itself confronting a multi-million dollar revenue shortfall prompting the submission of the Amended Response to the Petition for Compulsory Interest Arbitration in which it withdrew its salary proposal and substituted a proposal for zero percent increase in each and other two years. 
·:) 
.....~---·, 

The Employer asse1ts the PBA refuses to aclcnowledge the seriousness ofthe City's financial position in both its cash flow and total revenue 
10 


) considerations. It refuse:, to acknowledge that the budgeted 3 and 2.5 percent increases were effectively nullified when the State was unable to provide the $31 million aid increase. So far as Buffalo is concerned, the money to pay these increases never actually ,existed within its resources and 
./••·
,,, 

,now, never will., The Employer :believes that the 3 percent increase:for the , , first year, standirt~-,alone would cbst the, City: nominall}{l$!l;;7 miilionifer the, 
•first year and w.1other nominalli•/81.75 1million in the: second:,year and the -,··
,···· :City does not have that money arid is nbt in any position to obtain it ,A.ii 
Awan:l of 3 percent for the first year and 2.5 percent for the second, each · effective at the , commencement of the contract year, would cost the City · .nominally $5.9 million when it is.,already facing ~_$9 million budget gajt ·The City urges that it is unable'i'to respond positively. to the PBA wage ·proposal as is absolutely unable to· fund it as it (1) cannot obtain more State -Aid, (2) is extremely unlikely thilt it could· borrow the/required funds, (30 cannot raise tmtes to•, fund .the p:roposak without severely jeopardizing the ·,City's bond ratiitg, arid (4) is· facing a negative.cash position in the secorid 

:.;yea:r; rtmderingG.!it uifable' ,to: fin_\U).Ce any .!portfum.of,,t.J:ie-propqsabout .iii£ . .,,1.,savings,,::of.,resei:ves;,~_.; The :only ,.l!lptiona:i.open to• the Gl.ity, fotl<fundirrg. the :!1~ ;i.,;'f• ,r, :ipr0posal wouldhbe tfr,:Jayi•off:personnel; :J.nosylikely.publ,ic safetY:·Persqnne4 ;, •··.:wh}ch B\lffiil.6·ptopt>~es ,w6u1i:l be':contra.t-ytb th-e:!imere~:andhv.elfate-bfthe 
i C) ( ) .,'i) 
' 1 'public,;,il. fa:ctor'•Which· must be cidnsideted.'as it,,iste!Kpnesslyitecognized by. · ·the0statiit1:L,.:, ',: '''.. •: :., .... •. · :' .·,' ,,,. ;i, ,, · 
The ·CJty urges the Panel to discount testimony by the ·Union's financial expert that $3.2 milli0n of undesignated reserves was ·available presumably for funding'any awarded salary increase in the June 3-0, 2000 financial audit. It notes that .the City, in addressing its year two and year three problems, was already planning to utilize available fund balances to close the gap ·between expenditures and revenues. It calls attention to City· Exhibit 10 which was placed in evidence on February 12, 2002 consisting· of a financial statement 
. for the City as of June 20, 2001 which showed. an undesignated unreserved fund balance of$9.7 million. The Employer offers that those dollars are not available for funding increases as $2.7 million has been allocated to gap closure in the second year, and the ·remaining $7 million has been allocated to the third year. All that money therefore, has been targeted and spent and is no longer available for funding PBA salary demands. Buffalo, it is argued, clearly lacks the financial ability to pay for any increases in either ofthe two years within the purview ofthe panel's deliberations. 
J 

In addressing the specifics of the PBA comparisons, Buffalo notes that the contiguous towns have already settled their 2000-2001 CBAs in which they 


: . ) 
11 


awarded wage increases of approximately 4 percent per annum (Amherst), 3 percent per annum (Cheektowaga) and approximately 2.5 percent per annum (Tonawanda), and that the Buffalo PBA members do not lag far behind. The City bases its comparison on. the cqrrent wage oftop step police officers which shows a lag 0f only about,' I percent behind Amherst,,.'and nominally -·i.. \ 
... 5..3 percent ,behiil,d;},Chee,k.-towaga. Howeverdt,:emphees;-: that!:.!'simi;lar CJ ·. public employees working, unde.tfosimilar conditions" is only.one factor 'and that the panel must in addition consider. whether the City of Buffa.lo withctl:ts budgetary and cash flow problems, its credit rating, its shrinking tax margih, 
· its declining populatjon, its lower per eapita income, its. declining proper:ty values,· and its work rules is col]lparable to the_ more affluent communities cited by the PBA. . · •; 
.;.r; 
In fact; the City pleads; there ismo "comparable" for it1in the second yeaj-. 
No other mum:.cipaltty. has .the,,,:severe. problem of being ait its practical 

•fmaximum wifk:respect.to ptopetty tax :i:evenues... Moteo:ver :Buffalc, :has .ito :.· ...••,,r~~som.to :foreqast a,-shar,p rise in.15ales ~ revenue.' and~:tbe .prcispect fur Suite . , ,,.?, -_,r.: ·: , ;,.:,:Aid. is,,.furdt .fq:.J,e <f(af:at:,best. ,,fit repdttsi,thatdt: has,:1no, res'erves and it1;is . ',,,-,:,:" \1 .. 
,:. ::/!l:ll.Wke.J;y ,thatliiti!.Wotild:,be able tqiiborro:w,,rii();nej,;i arid .futther,1,'ipredfotst,it will ,.: ·'i'' . •i,,.f· 
· ,,:,run:: o:trt of.;cash:,,in,June. ;-,;JJhe 1comparil.bfe1;co:ii:tigu6tts,it6ni111urt:ities:i-reli'ed · .•:·.,•,,,r•il.;' · ,,;.\,,:,upon by-the ,P.BA;,,.oit is· argued/are,Iiotrcpns~ed bjfthe·tsame.'financfal · ,,11• ·'i: ;,-,r:, litnitatioris, aJid they can afford irtcreasesi whiclfoare· beyorid,·Buffald's ,reaih. ' ·. 1,.,, 
· They employ far fewer police officers and-are :notr according. to ·the-City, ·· .. · "' · bumping.up againsta constitutional tax· limit nor-are they faced.with bond ratings which are in jeopardy. Comparisons :with= these ,communities, 
'..) Buffalo asserts, is truly unfair. . 
The City urges that the PBA calculation of total compensation for police ·officers in-the comparable communities may. be afflicted.with computational problems:.'Moreover it challenges the validity oftlie assumptions supporting these calculations such as, fur example, the subtraction of the cost of health insurance coritributions for Buffalo but not for Amherst and Cheektowaga. Thi;; City urges that the PBA comparisons are totally selective and should not be considered in evaluating the parties' positions. 
Finally, with respect to the salary issue, Buffalo argues that there is no statutory requirement or suggestion that its officers must be paid wages exceeding or equal to those i11 Amherst, Cheektowaga and Tonawanda. The small margins by which PBA memJ:?ers fall short of their colleagues in these contiguous communities is putatively, not of such magnitude as to outweigh the statuto1y admonition to accord weight to "ability to pay" concerils. The 




12 
City offers that the time to argue for lockstep compatibility will come when
) 
the City has recovered financially and is on a sound basis. Future panels can 
implement the appropriate corrections if and when that happens, but the City 
urges that the current panel must avoid relying upon comparable practice to 



award ·benefits which the City, illi1its present strained condition, is uriable t6 
.fund..·.·:.· 1·. :, 1~~:.· ~;\; ..-:.. ::. .f~!;:1:. :::. ;-.'fr,.•·· ....: .,•: :::~~i,.
() 

The City's first health related proposal (City P.roposal 17) grows out of,a · ·change in the . prescription drug coverage benefits provided by the City's 

::y ,Health Maintenance Organization:'•:providers. Prior.to the change, scheduletl 
C) ;J· to take 'effect on July 1,2002, individuals being·served by th:e Independerli: Health provider paid a $7 dollar :per prescription co-payment but, after th~ change, became obligated to pay a $7/$15/$30 co-payment for generi(';( br,and name, ari4· non~formufa:ry prescriptions respectively. ]nose cdvere,d by the UniveraliHealthcare ,paid a, $5 co~payment per prescription a,nd the ·new three-tier .p:rescription rider will assess a.$5/$15/$3~i:per p~escription c<#. ·· ;pa,)JID.ent .: for -i\igene.ri'c, ,brand name, .0"?IIC:k non..,form:4btry: -i:prescriptions}. :-~respectively..-Toe City relates tlumit wastir(ormed, it,cci'itld no~fonger-,:obtaiii 
::· · . :•,a:l!singl¢ tier":,p:tescriptid'n.·rii;ier and itplea:i:hH:lmt ,as1 ai:~sult:if\is1iho,ilonget. · bl . ·. . th · . b ·, fits fth ,... 1· . · 'd'. E. ·1 ··
11 mi.·

_····--a.· e, tof5bontinuect · erpnor -. ene · ,o ,, ert,smg e:•tie11 ·-,n er,.::',,\uet mp oyer.· · · ; · "Ur:ges the Pimel·:to:frec·ognize\that-:this changi;:;is obctirring•'t;j'f.:.o:oe1.1,rred:6i:Jtsid'e, :0fits ccintrol and'lthatitdoes nofaccrue·tchhe Einpldy.ei!iVad.v.anfage in any : respect ·, .It ·seeks :,a·• determination fronr·the.: pan:el• ;that··its ·continuing:-· 
obligation-is only to provide a prescription drug -bene:fit,as offered by the . providers.· Buffalo seeks a CBA provision insulating it from liability for increased prescription drug co-payments arising out of the implementation ofthree tier co~payment plans by the providers. -The City does not provide an estim·ate ofthe·increased costs which will aris(.l as a result ofthe three-tier implementation, but" does indicate -that it considers ·the significance of their being· insulated from absorbing same to be ofa very'high order. 
A second City health-care related proposal (City Proposal No. 12) would affect employees hired prior to July 1, 2000 who currently pay twenty•five percent of the difference in cost between the second lowest cost HMO and either ofthe two more expensive plans; namely, Blue Cross and Blue Shield or Community Blue for single coverage, and 15 percent ofthe difference for family coverage. Employees liired after July I, 2000 who elect the more 



expensive coverage, pay I 00 percent of the difference and the City proposes that this requirement be extended t~ all e~ployees irrespective of the date of· 
hire. The Employer advises that this change would reduce its very high health care premium costs by approximately $410,000 per annum. It advises 

. ' 
13 


that only 249 out of 862 bargaining unit members currently subscribe to one of the more expensive coverages. Most of the saviugs would come from increased contributions by the 179 members who subscribe to traditional Blue Cross and Blue Shield coverage. Their individµal annual contributions would rise to nominally $1656kfor single cciver-age, ,and $2800 for family cover.age whiGh .the . Employer. concedes c:is· ,;a substantial .bur,qen; ."ithe . imposition of which is designedito create a significant disincentive to select 
· high-cost coverage. ;;;" · ,,-:­
A third City.health-care related1proposal {City Proposal No. 13) relatesrrto 

. :.. ne.w hires who· currently make-1n.o out-of-pocket contribution if they select either of the: two lowest price I:IMO options. · The City proposes ·.that new employees henceforth be.requii,ed to contribute 25 percent.of the.cost:•of single coverage, and 15 percent~ofthe -0ost of family ceverage of the: lowest 
: . price.option.,dBu:ffu,lo .states the,:intent:ofthis proposaVis to)Hnstitutiona:lize 
:: the notion of ·health insurantte cost, savings . goingti forward with ri.'ew 
,,2 employees.''.:J.:;\ti/Additionally; th¢ Employ.er· believeS1-i,"unpleinenta'iion -will ...f,, ,n , ,; ,,,,i:, str.ongly .enc0tirage,;-employees t(l) select·1he<'lea~ expensive c~verage11 Attthe ·.:.,·.i:,t.. :;!-; · :.-·,•;, -preseil;t··cosfJe:v.el ,ap&:asSl:iJ;D.ing~tan --avera:ge· of;:2Qme~i<'empioyees::per Y¢'ar, .·· .:'.\nq,:i-­:: ·.:·•the Gity· calculates:illlis, c:hang&.!.\1/0Uld-save $li4,'500,'.p.err..a@iln'.it and; would :L·; ~,.-,.;.,,· 
·-. : ,.--gr0w!?.in ,su'ccessive-,years·.to•·riseito possibzy:,0;13 percen'tiofl:wages. at'the::6nd ..,·.,-,,.. , .!;•·· •. · .oir1ite· :years: J, The City·· describes this·.·as a· ,minor· .concession; .and urges ' : . ,'.ii,_ . ·.:, ,implementation-proposing that even· smalh incrementa:lnsavingsiml;ty.--nobbe · .:' .:·. -, 
overlooked in :view ofits severe :fiscal problems. · ::;-·, :,: 
A fourth City ·health-care -related proposal. ('City Proposal No. 14) relates· to retirees. . At present retirees continue to receive;. HM:O coverage without making contributions and in this proposal Buffalo seeks to assess them for coverage ;On the same basis as new employees; .as .:outlined in the discussion · of City PF6posal No. 13, supra. Buffalo believes the implementation ofthis amendment to the CBA would provide savings of about $14,500 per year at 

. the inception with the possibility that it might increase if ·there were a number early retirements. 

IV. Opinion on Salary and Health-Related Issues 
The salient consideration in evaluating the Salary and Health related proposals is the question of ability to pay. We believe the Union correctly asserts that Buffalo's financial posi~ion as of June 30, 2000 did not preclude the possible adoption of improvements in wages and other terms of employment. The City itself proposed across-the-board salary increases of 


14 


'j 2.5 percent in each of the two years. Subsequently, it budgeted for a 3 percent and 2.5 percent sequence, albeit with the hope and expectation of achieving some reduction in health insurance premiums. However, Buffalo 
.suffered a severe reversal of fortune following the historic disaster of September 11, 2001 which led to a· :traumatic redu_ctio11 of $31, million in ,· .. ,
., · expec;ted State Aid .. This adversely affected both ,gross reve11ues:candicash . flow. The Union understates the magnitude of the :"-gap" yet to be clos'ed at ,·. the time of -the last hearing, placing it -at $5 million whereas the Bu;dget Director's undisputed testimon,y·pfaced it at $9 million (the earlier rept,rted sum of$7 mill.ion plus an additional $2 million in indebtedness incurred by an unusually severe snowfall)J~Moreover, undisputediestimony supports the conclusion. that the $22 · millioh Board of Edi.tcation• 'appropriation wa$ not siphoned out ofthe City's regular revenue stream and therefore,. we should not expect;i, like! sum to become available on ant,undesignated basis in succeeding,,y.ears because, that~enditure was a·ontl;'timeevent. ~" 
. . . . ~1 F-~ •~ ~ · . .,,,.Qash flow:isi~oncerned with the rate•;offein:flsw·:of inbi\)ming:id0llats-, w.lrleh is-.--:i.•, :,~ < .,,;, : c'(Chatacterizeid:,by ·orests and troughs;·. \.Wh'en the aggregate iriflciw at-;any;point .;•\: ,\ ,:, ·. ··::·• "idn tlie'budg~tcye'3l1is"il6'tiequali".to or'ih i:ixcess,_of.;th~;ag~gate pi'.Ymefits of;_;,'. .,,;;,·, :-::;• ) ; .. ,.. :;,its ·obligations;1. trr"e ·€!ify· is compeHed to botrotv· -fufids ·-to~ tide',iti' over by ,,,, •:'.,, · c:• ·. · · · ::'isstiing·,0Revehue·: Anticipatiofr;,Notes (RANS), or ·,':fax ·.Antie-ipa:tibn ,Notes , ,, . • s:·' ·;: :·..· · · · . ·."{TANS)·which indirectly affect· its abilityh:o·'pay bysipho:hlng:fuhds frtiin its . .•·-..· · · · ·reveaµe:-stream to··:fuian-ce· underwriting and:-inter.est::charges.· ,:.Phe PB~ :in · • ;.c \. ·. ·its . :arguments, suggests that the prevalence .of ·an,;:adequate ,· cash · flow -· · evidences an·ability to pay. In reality, it is more precisely related to how · well income and expenditures are coordinated time wise. The true measure of ability to pay.-is the ratio of' the magnitudes. of available income to necessary expenditures. Excesses. of income ., over expenses gener11-te··. surpluses. which appear in the fhnd: balance,:·'arid the PBA cites the accrual of a $1.4'million fund balance in the 1999/2000 budget year which grew to $9:7 million in the 2000/200_1 budget year as persuasive proof of improved . fiscal stamina and positively enhanced ability to pay. The Budget Director . confirmed that he has consistently striven to increase the fund balance in an effort to provide a margin of reserve to cope with contingencies and reduce dependency upon borrowing to meet cash flow shortfalls. We support the City's assertion that und(:}signated fund balances are not necessarily available to fhnd employee benefits. These monies may be required to achieve a balanced budget in the next succeeding year without raising the tax levy. However, even the fund balance is ~arried forward and regenerated, perhaps with some· augmentation, in the succeeding year it continues to contribute to the Employer's ability to pay by reducing underwriting and interest expenses 
15 


) which might otherwise be incurred. For cities as for individuals, a lender's positjon is ·preferable to a borrower's. We are unable to support the implied thesis that an employer's ability to pay has not reached its limit so long as any positive fund balance is being maintained. We take further exception to the, Union· assertion that the Employer's past claims of inability to payfrwere · without rtjerit-as.,it was. able-r;to. absorb .c0stsogenerated by sub.stantialt,past ,.·
0' 


·salary and fringe benefit improvements without, Adverse' effect as i\l our1;·: :finding, there has been a significant cumulative effe'ct. This is illus:i;rated graphically in Panel Chart I (page 16) which plots B:uffalo expenditures for · public safety functions as a percent of its total ·reven-µes from real estate and . sales taxes; The :chart indicates the percentage for the Police Department to : have been.relatively stable into the 1997/98 budget year after which it began rising at first somewhat mode,stly and then, rather sharply :from 1999/00; the ' . year cited by the;PBA as the one in which it'.receivecl9a 3 pereent'base salary :. increase a:t!id "significant improvement" .in. longel'ity (:.pay which%: was ,· 

· allegedly teiidily.:i:1.bsorbed. T;he fact,is that .the Po1ic¢ Department:opciliating '. . jtt , r!·· ·;:·,,cosj;s havelririremt!il now,consuine nontirially·.62.-.percerit:oftke €it3t!s·total·rea!,:;,:-; ;it. ,,,;,; . .:~rli,: i•:, ''" estate a,idt~ales·.,'.f'ax:re:v.enuesti Public ~Safe'io/ ,costsdlli:ave :'rusen ta:nleve:J;, 1lii ,t.: >:, ..,1,, 
.·,~fr ::' •·.,,., · :;:;\pe.fuerito:fl(that re;yenile~JeweLt,~ff'his-m:eaiiir tliat?B~;,:wii;hin~itsipreseiit taif.•,.,,-:,i :,.,~ . '.'-~­
y: · hstI\~~ti.we ·c~nstrafu~s;, ~'u!dM'all short,~f ~'n'ds.' ~th,wlriclrit°,'':5..ustain i~sh:'.· ;~,, .-,'fr
,) ( ),r 

..,. · · ,,: · ,u.,Pubhc· -Safe1¥futtctitms-:if 1t :allocated everyJpenny-,o.ftax,:revenue-s.·to .Publi:6:-s ,,:;--.:,.. bl 

• # 
·:Safety. :··· 1 n';· ~t··,': ;.; ~.... · ·.· ..r . : ·.~ <·, :,·_.,:·:-. -'. ftl ,;:; ·:· •.. :.-(~:-~·=·= ~-;:.:.-· :::· ~--· ·.,..~,,< :-h; · 


) 
While the:·foregoing indicates the severity of.the1Cityls financial plight, one. should not erroneously -infer that this un11appy circumstance arises because the PBA has en}oyed lavish increases. That would be far from the truth as the fact is that the-total compensation package ofBuffalo officers continues 
i ·. 
-,,_____ --~c---L~-~-~­
,, /; ' 

~ Q 
~ V' 0 0 

'--~\ ~-'1,--··
-~­

<.......JJ) . 
~! ...___/
' 
.....:.;-; ~t -: :r j
-·· 

'· ·.C.1· 6 h<''rt'·,, ;:_ · . -{ 
Pane \;;; a . ·._ 
·":.\~. 1~-:Pt -~ ~.:. 

Buffalo Expenditures':fof;Piibi(t.$t(~tf~s a%of Revenues 
· 

-
i.:;-­

93-94 94-95 95-96 96-97 97-98 99:99 . 99:00.:: .2000~01 2001-02 
. -.. -~ _:;'." .-:.1;: ;:::;;;~-:.:·;;:-·-;:.;:~---~i.r'-~--. -. 
·Calendar Years•·'· ,.,:-;,,-." ,.;, .:,•;,'-.:,. · · 
,::;.:·.-..::~ ~-;. 1/ . ~ 
.. ,-: :•:t l:•• --i~r. ,l,:": ;;,'::; /:::.. 
.,/· :-'::-. ,:. 


CJ 
17 


to lag behind those of similarly employed colleagues as it appears to have done historically. Panel Chart II (page 18) plots Buffalo Tax Revenues and Margin levels since 1993. For the recent period in which the sharp increases occurred in Chart I, we find sharp declines in the City's share of the real estate tax. levy as well-as in its Real Estate Tax plus the Sales ifax revenue . . , The.shruµ;rise shomndnthe tax margin,plot.is,misleading}as it a.rises out ofa 
· · faulty formula issued;;ipy New Your State in .the 98/99 .budge1/i:year• which was corrected the nm-year. Were it not for this error the plotrwould have followed approximatel;ythe dotted line between 1996 and 2000.,:, 
The most basic and vital employer responsibility is to provide effective Public Safety service~: If those services falter, . a city will-ildecline and · · ultimately:. cease fun¢oning. A city may offer good schools: and recreational. faci-lities,~but if·the public catti;tot adoess atid enj6y them in . safety; they are of.littl~tivalue: The Budget D~ectortin his -testim'.9ny outlined ,,_;:: 

· his)Jgap cfosingllproc#.dure. in "".hich,.the Pub~c Safety functio~): are the last ·,, -.i, ...to. b.¢'.:.expo.sedto•!~e c~~t shaving'.scalpel.tm,Htiis o~eat,thatithe -~agnitut16:of i1. .· .t }!.di d, . Staiel;i, Aidtcircmhscr,jhes >th~ 'ii.Qity,'.s .cipti-oils. ·,Jb.e' Mayorl$!' testi'itiohy ,•'. · -,.;, i;i.,;;;­
··.i.• ·.· •eniplrtas.ii¢ti ,1;be:,City's~epertdend-y.-u'pon 'Sta:tetrudii!)bs'erviiig thift: withbut,ttt, ~/( ·, ,:;:; ,r6, :!/ . ,thi'.ieity-:,:iwcrild',•be ex.perien:cmg/insurin•6un:fii:ble\itli:fiflculties;:;v:rTh<r·•re~drti · :,.,: , · "•" t,•••i ;i' , -sttpp'orts:tfui.t·assertiorifas between[ 1993/94 :1\tltliQ0.00/01;.1,Sfate'Wcid'vittual(y ·,,) ._,, :;,: ,·.-,•~ 
·.. doubled.' .reaching a Je;vel of' no:riiinfilly •$1:23'15: milliorir·-In ·most df that -:· !: ':i:'; 
·p~od; the-property ta:l!l levy hovered:arol.!'.ild,$;];50:n:d!Jiottper anrtum;'butby • . , · ','.''' .:,;-'· tfie,year2000/0l the fuII value average drb_pped andthe City was compelled •:; to. reduce the rate in order to retain the,:tax margin: It was coin.pelled· to repeat this procedure _for the year 2001102. The City.continues to be faced with declining fortunes and though everyone.concerned undoubtedly hopes the Union's optimistic forecast materializes and enriches the City's coffers, -· 
·.o~e may not consider that prospect has .augmented· Buffalo's .ability to pay until it is actually realized. Buffa.lo budget development is a high wire act executed while hovering over ip.solvency and grasping state aid as a balancing pole. The Mayor testified to his :frequent and continuing pilgrimages to Albany to solicit State Aid and it does appear that duty will continue to be a prominent presence in his job description. 
We do not concur in the Uriion view that available mo~ey has been concealed in the past and that the practice continues at this time. The Employer may have engaged in a bit ofhyperbole, but it is clear that Buffalo has not accumulated obscene fund balances and there has been no suggestion 


/7"· 
·­

$160,000,000 
$140,000,000 
$120,000,000 
$100,000,000 
f

§ $80,000,000 
C 

$60,000,000 
$40,000,000 
$20,000,000 
$­

'I..,' ·s,1 0 0 Q; 0 
~ ·_, 

. ~--·-./ -..,~ 0 '.. "1--­
· 
'1-. •

~; .•,~,-;-----./ . { ·~r .:Hz=-.'.­;:· :~ .-,~:: y .~~ ;:: .i:. ...-.-· 
Panel'Chart If • 
.t; ·J..~·. L ...;·:h .;~?-. 
··= ·...:: 

.I.:({· -~k-"it¥ i:'.,f.~: -~~ ·,: : F
Buffalo Tax Reli'enqE/.ian<i Margin History 
. .:~~; *~ !t i~'.··. 'i~--·r:····;.-,, 

.,; 
~~-~-j·~ ··"' \;'.: ti·. ~?. :::.-: 
--Margins 

....
-cityShare of Real Estate Tax Levy 
00 
--City Share ofRear Estate Tax Levy Plus Sl!les Tax Revenue 
~­
•' 
--­
"' 
~ /::. ,:.: ·f1... ~; 
.. .--.·,:; ·.;;~~ ·,'.·.·:;-·:..)t-?·~·:·•·..., 
93-94 9f-95 95-96 •95.97 ·97°98. · 9g:9g-..., 99-00' 200().. 2001­
---. --,~ · '/ ::i ;; -;,_-\01.-. 02 .•-: ·•·. 
•)Y~rr~") -~· ;-H,::~:,;, ••~t: ~,.:
~ lt•· 

;: }{.t:~,:1?' ~;·,ii<A ··f 
19 


. the City has :frivolously appropriated funds to other projects which more responsibly should have been devoted to Public Safety. 
The City had reserved funding of $1.7 million to support a 3 percent increase in the first year, and $328 millionto fund the ca:by forward ofthe 3 ,,,percent plus a11,,;!:(cjditional 2.$ percent .in..crease in,,y.ear;;two.. These, m6ni"es a were in .. ·the budget·.-da~ presented to the panel' wJJ_en the Financial Statement as of.June JO, 2001 (City Exhibit 10) was introHuced,.showing an undesignated, unreserved fund of $9.7 million. $2.7 million ofthat·amount had already been:allocated to the second-year in the process of "gap" closing for that year. 'I)he remaining $7 million was allocated to the third ye.ar, a year which lies b.eyond the jurisdiction of this panel.. While City Exhibit 7, which is in evicwnce, does discuss the third fiscal year, its inclusion in:the 
-> docitment -js not(the equivalent of a budget p:reseii,-taticf!;i whicl;i has been > _1 "':rsubJected .to adyersariE!l examinationr,m:td gebate,:c,. Th1:i; allocation of $7 ._ :,. ,, :, ,;, 'mill.ion into-;the :lihird ye!U" may well hav.¢, been prudent anjexei;1#ed:withoui -· :{ ~ .1; -. , -~+;!:inti#t to ci:ipce~\but.tli~; fact cif its. trimsfer .:bey.oni:lfahe ;f#rm o.i;~~-Pai!el'sf . · 11'.•\i ,, (:,i r :;-,,duril!.Pictioll-;non~thele~~1.:li~ presi.~.r@,)imp;ediineijtlas j.e imp~~m,entation,;C _;,-:,,.. · ~•­,._' ', '' ,:, ~-.'· ';-, of-:'(i"UF'A-ward'\will irieeessitrily OCClii:r'tduring ;·ithei;'.'thirdifi¥eail),Byt<wa~;-efY' '-; ,, '-Fi ' '(/J t { _) i: );: J -•_:__, \'Jn~~r8;ti?~;,_i~e ~_:;ertt¥;the•,:$3 r-,~_·11i_.on;io_~s:~f ~~a~iAi?i1:~ the~_e_·'be_d?__ ~Y:ar'~'. ,'d, •\: ·-? 
J , . .:,,-· , ". . :,. $19;/mtllio-1:1 \of,J:f;\at SU;l1l.WSl! attributed .·to:--a,,fossc:ofh''spm~up";,,a'::tem.r,, wljich~, -,:, ·.,,.,.; -.< , , ._;. . . ,::; ·, ; :'.refers t0 the pricticei•of permitting ,a niunioipitlity to Hook:,a:ii:,'a:JJbcafidh;,; "t C:. ! ·. -, ·:e· . ._forthcoming,in:the next .fiscal year i7t,the•im·mediately prece~g-fiscal year.rs: ·. :.-:,.,·,-. ·.· .,.,, 
-,At some point in history, BuffaJo ,was first authorized to··do thfs.,artd· inithat,, year -$19 million was hooked twice. If no further: action wercitaken:; $19· · million would not have been forthcoming in the next year with payment on ­schedule being reinstituted in the third or next occurring year, However, , that did not occur, presumably because the City could not do.withoutthe $19 ·_ million in the second-year, as another "spin-up" was •-authoi-ized; · ,·That: procedure contin:ued sequentially u:ntil the cutback was implemented in the 2001/02 budget year. The Mayor, under cross-e'.?{amination, was asked whether the 2001/02 withholding :represented a permanent revocation ·ofth~ benefit or merely an action · which would .synchronize payments· with . the 
_j budget year in which they actually become due. The witness responded that 
: 'J he was not certain about whether the payments would be restored on a timely basis or were being permanently withdrawn and further opined that he thought the latter likely to be the case. Clearly, the restoration or non­restoration of the former "spin-up" may be very significant but since it would presumably occur during the_ third year, this Pane] would be unaware of it and both unable and unauthorized to factor it into its thinking. 

' ) 
20 


A,;; we comprehend it, the statutory requirement to weigh-in "ability to pay" does not imply a binary choice between "pay" and "no pay". We perceive we are obligated to limit the magnitude ofcosts to maintain them within the Employer's reasonable reach whereas comparability, standing alone, would 
justify greater ipayments. This could of course lead to awarding a zero .... increase .biit that, is. clearly orily.·one option,.•in tbe't,matter:t at hand, -Wd 'have , . ,. , . · 
a 
· considered ·thabibption but sought to identify other possibly more equitable solutions consistent with respecting the fiscal straitjacket i:incasing the City. 

We are· directed to consider among others,. prevailing ,working conditions and earnings ii:r private employment iii comparable communities. Panel Chart ID (pagei21) plots the relationship between.Erie County private sector annual eamings*and the CPI U for Erie County per. City Exhibit 2. This indicates that tlfe earnings of,private sectoti employees •liave not only kept s pac\3 with· the €PI, but actually rose·•:at a<slightly, higher rate in-the last
C) 
, several ye~s. ~a.in. t~lying upon City Exhibit, 2, ·a,nd v;i~wingrt;be first and .:;-;, second years r¢trospec.tively, ·we :filndt{€PI ii1crease'si·of.,~i6 andii3i:iJ/pereent :\/5: /ii '. .,: respectively. W~ not~i¥so that the,:avetage ..,:iivage ili¢rea!i oft!felc'ontiguous· .,,,,::, · ,,z,i . , :• .: Town~,fdrithe•!filst yeii:r,was ·nomina:lly. 3.2i'ipei.6ent\!butrifrerehi'tle:ti:o· di:tta'iil !/,., · . :·i,:;: . 

•·: the:;,,record frelij:ting \fo,iil:he: :'secorid~yeat\ .:.: P.ancil Chart'.!In ir!'cl'Utl¢s1 aH< the ·:.. ;,-·· • · ,,,.,,,. . ':private. sector >and ttllrthe, Etie· ,Countyctifrmrurtities, ,;~fum&:;'t>f 'whiclf are· ·' ·: :· •,··:: 
•.•,affluent ·Buffl(lb regrettably, 'i~ iiot a:tt:iohgJthetn; a:hd it:ik'a hai!lh•.. ~&oni:i'lilic' •!·· ,..... • .:. reality that· employees ,share ,in,,,the ·poverty of their eriiplbyett' The ·P.B.A-' · ·members have lagged behihd ·similarly employed· colleagues iitmore affl:uent. communities, and it is surely not.realistic to expect that those differentials can be narrowed in: a period when the jurisdiction is withstanding a $31 million reduction in State Aid. The significance of this reduction becomes sharply defined, when •One considers that the scheduled :state Aid equaled• 
. more than twice the City's revenue from the· property tax levy. We have 
I ) sought to devise a proposal which will only minimize any broadening ofthe compensation differenti~ls without exceeding Buffalo's ability to pay. 
We have established that the City continues to hold in reserve sufficient funds to support a 2.5 percent increase in the second-year but has not reserved any money to fund ari. increase in the first year. We conclude an equitable resolution of the salary aspect can be reached by awarding a 2 1/4 percent increase in each ofthe two years. 
11 .. , --~---~~~-~-~­
... 
r, 

'',,) '...)
,., ~ '---'' ''-' '-' ~ ~ 
r· 

,. ¼;~ ·=7fl; ,=:) _;; ·? -t -~-:}.. #~. :jit. •,;;• ,_,,
lt'r(heJ C.hai-f Ill 
.!I ?-~;:.· :},: .-~{ \~.. ~1·· ·>. 
·~ t( S~l:·. { · ­
Erie Co_unty f;!riya\, ~-~J;[l,:<Jp*1g~ v: CPI 
\''. ::• -.~·. ,€_.·":..:\ ;:.i. ,,.. • ,:,c 

y-· 
50000 
* ..-:r· 
45000 
., 

40000 
·"'.,, 
35000 -~;~· 
80 30000 
f 

.ll! ~ 0 '-00\iJ Annual Earnings 
£l 60 ­
-+-CPI per City Exhibit 2 \· 
";~ 
''>40.~t. ~1; ~~ ..)::;_ 
~­
·20:,. .,
..... 
•-· .·."J..,:· i;::•:. ;;:;t,-:::f->?i}-t:·;.rr.:-~:·.:-;;•, .:..;. :· ·.· ,... : 0
199a • 1ss.7 :·: .-,,ds'ii1r0,r,,·.;.v.1s!'l1f,"''··,'2oeo ­

·.• :~. :t,,.:~:.~::-~:::·~?•·,·· .. .,::.;-· • calencjafYearsc>: ._,.,, .. .,E ~. . : . ~} -/:-jtMo~·:t ·-f~: ....~!}:·· ·~-· .;,) 
~ :. ~:-1:,. ~;}; .:,. 
·;~ ..... >:~--~r-~:t~t~·;:~)t -~if~· 
. • !.: ! 
-._;;:· 

22 

) Accordingly, our award will provide as follows: t 
1. 
Effective July 1, 2000, all salaries shall be increased by two and one quarter (2 ¼%) pe1•cent. 

2. 
i:Effective July l, 2001, all salaties shall:be increased . : by two, and .one qua1·ter (2 ¼ % ) percentt .,. ; : . • , ... ,: 

3. 
'-,The follovi':ing chart (page 23) shall be appended .to · \the Agreement: .t 




•·:. ~­
.. 
-~ .t.·' 
T.f~-. ;'{~--.:,~)t~::~,r.:: ·tHtf ~-.-\, 
·~·:.-~~\ t~. . .:'i, 

·:·: : .~•-:'~ 
i~f:•.;_1}+.:t~f'•
... ,,

•/· rr-i .: •~:! . , _!;Y•. .l\;·../· -i/:.~-irttr:tJ ;i~< 
. ,_:,... ·. ~i­
·/. ·:? ;: ·::~J..~i--"':.. Vt 

) 



23 
r 
SALARmS EFFECTIVE07-01-2000 & 07-l!I-2001 
?JI •.. 



....2.'25% .,. . lr00R'RATEJ 2,25%. , ...., 071!)1/l0OO 07/0:taDOO;·'" , 07~1 .. ,,.POLICEOF.FICJ!RSl'EPl 
Sli,l144 51g.97· .~ $31,775 
. 
$40,190 $20.63 S41;094 ,.. POIJCE.Ol'FICEn smP 3 
.;°POLICE 011JilCERSTllP.z 
S43,442 522.30 S44,4l9 
$46,691 S23.97 S47,742 ...:,POIJCEOFFICER S'I/EP5 
,:.iottCE 911FICER 8'fEP4 
$49,!148 S25.64 $51,~ 
,..._.: •. 

Our focus at this juncture is on the funding ofthe 2 1/4 percent awarded for the first year. Each I percent of salazy aggregates to $571,000 per annu1n. Hence, the cost of financing a 2 1/4 percent increase will equal nominally · $1,285,000 for a each of the two years. It may be necessary to fund this increase through staff reduction to effect an offsetting saving. Utilizing the 


'.) 
J 
. ·:·\•. ·r ' 
) (') )i:'.,. 
24 
Budget Director's figure, of$60,000 per year per position, this would lead to a reduction of 21 positions. Thus, the choice we perceive is between retaining· a force of nominally 815 officers who are likely to ·respond to a zero· salary adjustment with diminished morale and esprit de corps, and reta.irtmg a force of nominally 790 officers 1&vhose :·resentment against a 
.-comptilsion. ,to .wor-k. harder may be mollifie.9ifiby,th.e knov,aedge that .;fue­·em.pfoy.er has, under.. extremely. difficult circumstances, attempted, with less ­than ·.e6mplete success, to maintain their compens'ation . status vis-a-vis colleagues in the region at large. We recognize thatJhis'poses a dile1t1ma. Neither choi:~e is a happy one and reasonable•cpeop]e; may readily differ in identifying tlie less desirable option. We believe aiJay-of:t:·· should it be required, though not always desirable, is the preferable course of action at this point in this sittla1ion: Eeyond_ helpip.g to_,; maintain-morale, it_ encour~ges :the parties to innovate and devise!q,rodiiµtivity improvements: The iitbreas~ epjoye~ _in priyate employmentim Eri~~County (Panel\ehart ITIJ ~dou9i,c!!:Y r~pected;:-,the impact _.·of jprodu~v,jty improv~ments. _ 

:Empfoif,,ees ::-~~l)C:)'uld: i}be -\a-Wafe tnat pro:iluctiij!fty ,im;}!~&#en:t:$nts, ipt.fstheif ·_empli;),~eti1;½,1i,'j~tig~s •~ay:4~JP t<:> support wiite ~q{~~ar-y #n,p~velll,.ents,i ·We aiH_cnowledg'eitli6flimitations ofthis optionfl!S sev~~e:i's'tafl)mg!ft'eduetionif , ­,,i,re'· ptene-i:tdilicieiaterfqeµiarid-$ ;for mote(iovertime,,:1#rt~\~thet~(ote· •b~come· -:coun!~fpro~4.6~~~_;:_:. _if(! :('.'> . : , ·--: . :\~-,-/)'i,\:{::,jj;j Y;:, < . }' '_ ·· 
--. 

-We fase a'se'pond problem in<adopting this remedy;is(that,is1;aff:adjustments may not be:'retro·activ~ly applied, and the two-yea:r',term-:of ~his panel's jurisdiction has -~fl,dy !'lxpired. As noted earlier, the retroactive-first-year. salary ·amounting to nominally $2.57 million will need to be paid in the third year in addition to the ·monies reserved to pay a.2.5 percent second-year. increase. ·We are not privy to the resources which'may be available in the· third year and we. acknowledge that if the cost is to: be offset soiely through staff reductions, it may be necessary to borrow. Such action would be in 
_lieu of seeking sharper s1affreductions in an effort to recoup :funds required to discharge an obligation incurred over a two-year period in a ·shorter period of time. · 
The PBA proposes (PBA Proposal 14) that the City commence providing fully paid major medical coverage and all existing riders upon retirement. We deny that proposal as, at best, only a very small margin ofability to pay is available, and it should be allocated to higher priority proposals. 
' . I 

25 

The second health-related PBA proposal (PBA Proposal 15) is for the upgrade of the Gill Spectrum One Plan to the GHI Prefe1Ted ·Plan. We support this proposal with an effective implementation date of June 29, 2002. The cost of this upgrade is just shy of $300,000 per annum and is therefo.re· the equivalent of nominally 1/2 percent of salacy. L.The _City.has prepar.ed for ,a 2.:--1/:2:.percent mcrease in,Jhe .second-year,.arid ,as. we have.,,. awarded 2 l/4 percent{ there .exists a residua1i4/4 percent which may be employed to defray ha.l£the cost ofthe dental p.r:ogram upgrade, ·There is, of course,,, no retroactive cost associated with this benefit as it :functionally. 
takes effect· with the inception ofthe third year./I'he Award will provide for the inclusion 6fthe following in a successor CB.A: 
. ,. -­
Article~ S.ection21.3 Dental Insurance.· ;,:f


::i·.,, ·••"'' ··,: ·. TheCity1s···firsthel:!,lth.;r-elatedJtroposal (City Prt1posald:'7);J:!l"to'-be,insulated•:· :J1,;• from responsibility or. li;ability to absorb costs arising :as,-ai re~ultiof· the 
·· J implementation of 'the '"three-tier" prescription· drug· rider ·by .:the HMO providers, The· puzpose ofco-payments is to sensitize consumers to the cost of services .and products...thereby to encourage prudent purchasing where . possible. It is therefore appropriate to burden consum-ers with-increased co­pay charges. We therefor-e support the City's petition and the ,A.ward· will provide for the inclusion ofthe following in the successor CBA:Article XXI Section 21.l 
... 
Add fourth paragraph in blue book (7/1/86-6/30/88) CBA to read: 
Effective June 30, 2002, changes in the co-pay prescription drug requirement arising out of implementation of the three~tier prescription co-pay provisions by ·the HMO (Health Maintenance Organization) health care providers shall be the
) 

responsibility of the individual subsc1iber. 
26 


There is a second outstanding issue relating to the co-payment change which is limited to coverage provided by the Univera HMO plan which scheduled its adoption of the three-tier arrangement on July 1, 2001. This change precipitated a grievance against the City by the, PBA which is currently awaiting:,resolutionin arbitration. This award will,"provide fo.r the withdrawal ofathaLdemandi,for arbitration,:and ceding ~djudic.ative f.\\"sponsibility to this panel as,a matter ofretained jurisdiction. · ;~,1 "; ,: 
The PBA shall withdraw its demand-' for :arbitration concerned with possible co-payment 1tesponsibilities of sµbscribers to, the Univera HMO p~all-for ithe period commencing July l;, 2001 to Juneir 30, ·2002 '\'iiith adjudicatory authority over that matter being ceded to tllis Paiiel as a matter .of retained jwisdfction. ·: 
'7'.''. • _r,:_ ~r\ ,:--:• · Article .]{IX, Seotion .. 19.1 _: Unifomi, · Equipment, .,iand Maintenance :Aliowatt~e _.:::)iiif -~~it-.. ;f~t·· :=: {---f( ;f-·, ~ , ; \:,:-;;.:r;, ./~~•' Ji,;<; ; : ..• .:;. ;l' '.
:!~rt 
' . ' 
fi' :( ••
:!;~-..~·:1:t:}Vt< -·~:~-::: '{:" ':;·\~h ,'!1.!:. ..:::)i:~·. ,): ,: i~• _: 
,:,-, 19.Cl:F'Aillowance· : ·· · ' .-:r.,~1:~i(+t;-i:~l •:):~.... '; • :1 '.·=· 
'",•'.'i",• •• • ,,: -~~--.·•,·:.-,,:,._·,·,••·.·,·.· ,,,,,·... '_.-_: ••••• • ..,... -~· ;, ... ~; ••• , • 
'' . .; :....• _,: ' . ':\:·. ·.~ :: ... ..,... 
·Ef.fecti:v~,:;Juiy 1, 20!}1, the City shaU·pay.:,an,annu'ai· _:. ·,,, ·· uniform allowance of One Hundred and Fifty•($l50) :..· . , ; · . ·.\ Dollars._• Such,:payment ·shall: be· made-· on/or.' befoJ:lei~, ,:,,:-, , . .->,·, -:, , September 30th of e.ach year. · .:;-. . ;, · .-, : 

Buffalo's second health-care related proposal (City Proposal 121 is to require all employees subscribing to the more expensiv.e, options 1to pay 100 percent of the· difference between the cost of that option and the second lowest cost plan, This would affect employees hired,prior to·-July,1,.2000 who are now contributing only 25 and 15 percent for individual and family coverage, respectively. The added charge would be the equivalent of a 3 to 4 percent pay cut ·an affected employees. We believe that would be · inequitable and the proposal is denied. 
The City's third health-care related proposal (City Proposal 13) is for newly hired people, who currently make no out-of-pocket contribution if they opt for coverage under the two· lowest price HMO plans, be required to contribute 25 percent of the cost of single coverage and 15 percent of the cost of family coverage of the lowest price option. We support the City to the eirtent ofimplementing this requirement for the first four years of 



-
27 


employment after which the benefi_t will be provided on the same basis as for people employed prior to the implementation of this new provision. · Accordingly, our Award will provide for the inclusion of the following in the successor agreement: 

' 
Ji~::J,: 


Add the folk1wing provision 
AH,,employees hired on or after June 30,i,2002,:,shall pay twenty,.five (25 % ) percent of th,~ monthly premium;for the "core coverage" for indi:v.iduals and ~een (16%) percent of the: monthly pfumtium for· thr,:, "cote coverage" for family ·coverage. '1'Core coverage1-' is understood to consist of, the {least. ,•;•; 
.exfensi:v~;_l\~dical Insur;mce Option•,avaiJable dtt the . ·tiriie of,.We'itlf ru,new hw.e elects e:nr-ollment m.-oiieiibt ,;,-.:_.:,_, ,.. ·.·: the. mQ:r.~::;(eli!pen'siv.e,.plans, he/she will contribu,~¢,m ,,1,. -: , ,,,., ·" •. · ,-., additio'fi,r,ri,to.,,Affi~i-foregoing, ,,one hund~ed ff,00;%) .;;:. J·:,, ,.. ·. -·. pet'cent ,;iofi:Jhe.~-'tlifference between thew;bOstto(,,tlie ,.,::-, ' ,,. ·c~·.i,.:,,· '>· selecfe'd,pla.n\anclithe co§t·offl'core coverate'1.-Ji-;i;;,"i"'·; .j ":; <:.,· .. •.,: 
.. ·.·~:.,~•:->·~~i)_;_;. ,· ·.. ,.~ ...·.~•-.:•> .:-... -· ·Upon,,cOiilJtle.tion ,-of·,four; (4)• years· of se11vice~,,with:;-:f-l,;ct ,,Ji>,::.:,·-~:;, . , ,' . ·anmver-slil,Y dates being,calculated on the same basis.·,,.-. _,· ·f .·.. ·, · as for longevity entitlements, an employee'.s coverage . shall become·the.s_ame· as for employees hh-ed·prior to June.JO, 2002.; ·... 


The City's f0urth· health~oare related proposal (Gty· Proposal-14) would require new retirees who he1¥tofore continued to receive HMO coverage without inaking contributions to commence doing so_ on the same basis as new employees. We believe the proposal violates at least an implied social contract between the retiree and the City under the tenns of which the retiree rendered service with the reasonable expectation that he/she would be provided fully paid HMO coverage in retirement. We therefore deny the proposal. 
28 

) 


V. Other Proposals Included in Award 
F1tneralRelated Expenses (PBA Proposal 9) · :1 • . ,­

;•., -The Union.Ji-as petitioned,.fot-ui provision :whichJwoultlmbliga:te the Employer.;, ,. provide as milch as $15,000 to be used for funeral-related expenses incurred .:. in connection with;the,intennent of an officer killed,iin the.line of duty. In such tragic 'circumstances the parties are partners in'.-grief.and-.:we think it appropriate ;that their partnership extend to funding.Ha tribute. -· This panel provides for/tthe establishment of a jointly-fund~d re$(lrve of $25,000 to be· funded by·.•i equali contributions by the Employer and-..,the . Union. Accordinglj.;r· the successor Agreement· shall -be a.mended\: to· include the. 
•following: '?~ ·.;'. ·t~ '.'i· 
Article~-Fu~ra!,Expense Flllld . , ,:;;J . ·(!! ·f ,. . )·~.:\ ... 1.1!t,Ji.. ~ :~), '·. :i: --~,.Ji ): ..•·~$.t ;· A~i~-ft,:.;. : :•/;~,.
-;.'!~I 'i.~, 
,;• i Th~ Cityid1~d :the ·PBA shall estab~ ati!,iftjri:er.aht , {;.~}. .;,, . 
•..:, EXJfens~~:Jt-Ennd:f;:, 0£' t)venty-•five :t1to~and;\\i~"161hi:rsii :f> I',~.,··· 
·.• -·· ($2S,000)·#o.111!e·•"!i5e!f to,,,defray •funeral:iexpeii$~~,;(~dc\:, ·-; ,';. :, .,-1• ­di:r,~ctly•',.iJ!Jlatedlitosts which":m.ay be inGl.ll'r_e.d~m;d:he,i-,;,,, ';;,l,;,_ '. ,. interm«fut, or:inipaying-respect to an o:flicer,kilied'ln;; l · >..,.. ,·. 


· "'i' · the•llite1:of.1duty.,t;ifhet€ity::and, the PBA-shidl,cooiti.r.ibtrte; t:l ,:,,e,A, ·t,·,,•·. ·• . · 
· to the. Friµd-iwith payments of twelfth thousaiiddi~e:;·' ·,:, , .: . hmicked dollars ·($12,500) each which Fwd shall be. administered ·· by the PBA. · · The money shall be maintained in. a s.eparate interest-bearing .account with . . · ... the· Police Credit U~on. The PBA shall promptly , advise the City of any withdrawal from the fund. and shall provide accounting upon 1·equest, -Expended funds shall be r~plenished by the City and the PBA with equal contributions by each, within thirty (30) calendar days following disbw·sement. Any dispute regarding the Fund shall be .submitted to expedited ai·bitration. 

Longevity Allowances (PBA Proposal 8) PBA proposes an officer become_ entitled to a pro rata share of his/her longevity allowance in his/her final year of service where employment terminates efore the individual's anniversary date. We conclude the proposal 


,. 

) 
29 
is supportable only as it relates to severance occasioned by retirement. This does not impose a cost purden on the City as an individual delaying until his/her anniversary date would collect the.full increment. More significantly however, a retiring senior officer who may be drawing over $2,000 per. annum in l_ongevity allowance will be replaced by a.;'new recruit who,at that . 
·-.mome11t :wiJL not.hav.eiqu'alified .for.,;a longevity.,allow.ance.,,,1-The,.granting.i:>f· ..· this proposal should in fact provide Buffalo with a iBmall annual saving and.: the successor Agreement shall be ~ended to include ..the following: 
Article XXIII (E)~0Longevity. 
~ ~ w 
Effective.,July 1, 2001, an Employee whofu retirmg,.on attjeffective date.piio1· to'his/her anniversary da~e, shall receive longevity pay pro rated on·a monthly basis to· 
befoalculitted by multiplying one twelfth (,1/12 th) ofthe ,-·1·· 
fttU! annµaL, entitlement by the · num,ber .o:f. ,fully,. ''·"' 
coniplete'a,:fuonths. of s¢twice'.COmmencing.-withtil.he:t:b ;, ·'' ,:.,r, 
amµve:it~~;dateand concluding with th~~ffectil{t,fdil.te;:, ,. ,:i :~t",;,.., 
,:, • ~ :t·u, ... ,. , ' ,.. · · w ••,:·1··,\• ,·
o.a.1~r:etm_e1tt~nt-.:: 
··:·.-~ ~ :,: ·:_:1/1 ::~:• $;-U: ~tt::•..=tf~W:~fi:t!: · •.::· 
-~h#-· ·-ft\;;f;~.fi.~\,:{ :·-( ..-. 
.l~~~~, .:;r.,:rr;~•\:1::t;.::; ,~t... ,_._. ..: ·.·:.. 

· ·.UniformMainten'aneei(PBA,Proposal-11) c:· , ·•.fr ·,t0,-..·,.:.,t-1 _-··,, ,, !: .·,; •. The 'expiredtAgre¢me:nt·provides,,for-the. payment of;,$1'0f);,,1:7en:~om,:ttr be,,. · · -..· used for the· care.,ahd· cleaning;.of.uniforms .. PBA pleads that :tliis;-allowance•, is grossly inadequate, 'having 'become effective in September 1989,: The PBA · proposes an· increase to $675 per annum and seeks to justify its proposal on.the ,basis ofcomparable practice in other jurisdictions, -. The, City contends this money ,is·. intended only_ for washing and,. cleaning of'. the Officer's uniform and'. that it .is therefore, entirely·:reasonable. -:.The. City asserts the PBA Proposal would add about $565,000 to its annual cost which is the nomim!,l equivalent of 1 percent of wage;s. A panel. majority does_ not subscribe to the notion that an allowance established in 1989 continues to be "entirely reasonable" but neither can we subscribe to the Union proposal which is clearly much too costly. We have settled on a nominal adjustment of$50 raising the allowance to $150 per annum effective July 1, 2001. This will add a modest $40,000 per annum to be accommodated in a budget of over $70 million. Accordingly, the successor Agreement shall be modified to state as follows: 
-
30 

Article XIX, Section 19.1-Uniform, Equipment, and Maintenance 
Allowance · · 
19.l Allowance 

.,.,._ Effe~tive July,:,1,,/2001, the, CTty shalli,pay;i4an, iumual ,, ,,. ,,i, r·. ,_. 
:unifbi"lll allowruice of One, Hundred and ,,J\;ifty ($150) Dollai·s. Such "payments shall be .made on1, or before September30th ofeach year.. •­

Paychecks (PBA Proposal 12)' Y. The Uni6n propose~· that each officer's paycheck. be• placel:I in a sealed · , . envelope 'prioi,':to diitribution in ord~ to prevent disclosure of confidential " • 
. infonnation t(f,a:nyod~ viewing the table on which-the\bhecks.,are deposited ·:;:· for pick-up .... ?a,he City maintains the'PBA,_has not show,n a trot n'.eed for this•, ,, ''· ,,,. change ·whic.1i%1wouldi.ii-.e14hir1fthe Cify to slither purchase neWBecyuipnient,or:,;;\~-' >: , "'''·· hire·an ·additiillnal ·empl!:iyee4:o perform the\function, n:e.ithet,~wliiclt,it can,;;,,,,., ·:,:: 

afford. ·· The:f<}i)anel'-ie'ljfi~µrsiin ·-theassertibn ,that>·an~,,¢:fficetif:silienti't:led: :to' ,;•. :;; .· ... 
,}: ·• · confidentia!ity'i and ·1hh'l/persona1 infonnatioil appearing· on {the, ;pecluction;,, t:: . ··• ,-, .,, stub m~y breaeh· thatierttitletile:nt. We have further determiirt1dithat the stub' , ,; . may be foldeEI; ovetl·irtJ.d·sJ:apled: concealing the persoria:l infomiationi,while, .,. · 
' ·.1• i::, ::, ,-:·--· leavtnif-the·p9o/ee1s:1,i1:tentmoatio11f fully visible.· . · The, .succeiSsor,;;Ajgre-ement·,·'! , ., . , . • .·, 
•, will therefore providt for.-'tlie delivery•of paychecks with the·stub folded,,and, , 
) stapled or otherwisec seburci:t Accordingly, the successor Agreement shall · incorporate the following~ · 
Article II, Sectioli2:l (G) 
1 
Pay checks shall be delivered with the .flap, folded and stapled to conceal the amount . of the check and deductions and the nature thereof. 

Detailing (PBA Proposal 18) . Detailing in the present context refers to the practice of assigning an officer outside of his patrol· district.. While some detailing has long been 

'.) 
31 


pennissible, Buffalo sought to broaden-the number ofpennissible conditions for resorting to detailing. The Union opposed any extension· of the Employer's options, contending it would be used to make long-tenn assignments and implement wholesale transfers instead of maintaining staffing levels. This issue was addressed ·in vety substantial .detail in an Award by;,a Compulsory llnterest.Arbitration .. pan_E/b(PE&B Gase;N~.JA::,96,.·, 035; M 9.6~297):,chaired by Robert Rabin which isf;referredsfo: as the Ra:bin Award. r;rhis Award denied the City the absolute right to.·detail. officers between Districts, but it did extend the City's options in, recognition ofthe 
need for greater1flexibility in the deployment of its personnel. The Award delineates specific guidelines for detailing officers .of:any rank between Districts.,f The ::Award further specifies that the-~'1anguage• provided is to constitute:;a prov;isional solution, .under which:d:he ©ity's utilization would be monitorei;lr and· provide a basis for proposed future whanges admonishing·a:ny future interest aribitration panel.to "consider .the patties' ezj)er.ience with this langtiage!,-.~i ·:.t .. i ; --,..~i~ . if {J .. •... ~_,: 
· · 1·t ,: .· · · ..t\ · . ·i·:::., ,;, · · · 
'•.?,::; ·H}' :-t~~\~-~~::.. ·-t: ,::'.'.• ·:-"..'.l( .. ~-.. ·•..• ~-: ~tf ·.r4·/ti-!•~\~\tt1 h. f::~,··;•-.~~-(.:;..·-: 
'The PBA!:.,clai~~the,City.has .'abused,.the pro'visimn a.n:4,l$tbee~· .fourid,i:to .t, ,:. ,,~, haye,:dorieilSO m.:iilgti:evanc¢ arbitratioJJ. before·'Arbitratoi1flitfu:ID,rdtadvis:esi:that .'.i ·.' ,. ;, ';?:' moreithait:5,O0O:lgrievan.ces:hav.e,·bee.1rfile&·and it:.ipetitioii.i\,the:preselit panel, ,.·., · . ,,-,, :.-,:r, to ,rescind,1the,,-R:a.hiili piiovisional award: 'Fhe Grty aicgµestiithafa:the:iRab':in· ,.,. · .' Panel's dete.lliiinati'on,ievolved ,after, extensive ai:gument,,in,: .the1,,,fa,a:ring, · , process· and·•later1in,ti~Cl'cufrie,·session, • It.argues, that·,iti:w.as:w.eU:,understood° , ,. ·· ,,,... ,-.J· \ 

. that the City's"effot.t 'was·aimed at improvingjts ability-ttHillbcate: manpower and· reduce. overtime ,expenses; . If· further charges .that .the·,.PBA has consistently opposed expanding the detailing rights in an effort to increase overtime opportunities · and of course, attendant ..costs,; · The City acknowledges: ·that 1,561 grievances have been :filed• but asserts that the primary dispute is o:ver.the purpose ofthe detailing and argues,that the filing 
' ) of grievances is not, in and· of itself: evidence of abuse. It argues that the one case brought before an arbitrator led to a ruling in_the City's favor and· pleads that if the City were to lose or be curtailed in its ability to deploy manpower, .most likely, shortages in certain districts· would need to be filled on an overtime basis or be neglected. Buffalo argues that it cannot afford . more overtime and it should not be expected to neglect its responsib.ilities. 
The single arbitration decision to which both parties refer appears in the record as PBA Exhibit 9. In it arbitrator Pohl did deny the grievance on the basis that there was insufficient evidence from which to conclude the City violated either the CBA and/or the Rabin Interest Arbitration Award. The 

a 
32 


fundamental difficulty, as we perceive it, is that the Rabin Award has not been tested in arbitration despite the fact that more than 1500 grievances await adjudication. This problem arises because the parties' arbitration process has. broken down. This panel is not empowered to address the problenFhut it is obvious that it"is sorely in needa'pf attention. Other issues 

. before cl;,. wer~ cleni:ed,:,;basically becausei. the :,:proposii:ls-..i.:elatiti~ , ther.eto . presum6d an a¢cest::. to a working arbitration proce'ss. Ift-is important for the parties to, establish :a resurrected eft'.ective and efficiimt,a.rbitration process. In dealirig with the .detailing problem we do-nohfind sufficient. support ,for revocation of the Rabin provisional language. Ar,bitral resolutions of but a few of the 1500 grievances should,. we belie"l!e, flesh out the .skeletal provisions ofthe provisional language. We therefore urge the parties to re-­establish:Ja working arbitration system and. hold ithat the Rabin ,provisional lariguagei.: should be extended ;;in full force antl e:ffecf in the successor 
Agreemeht. .· •.i. ·): .y. ·.:r 
l•.· 
.:,'ifhe,Ra:bjri.P,anel Award r-especting Detailih'.g;-slrallo;•be: .i-t,1 :, 
.~.I
;.•r,,,,J. ' 1prese'r.yei:l-,; on> the existing provision:~ b~·imt !the ,,,. ;,,;,;:,-, ·;cl, 

. ,,rsuccessti!l'-'!A~ementil:·'.•,: ... . : '·:, -' ·•t-J.'.;'·fii!}i!i/i; ~rt ":.,:,; ,t.;.: '. . i 

.-Overtinii.Prbelidtff.lM' (City··Prop'osa:J: 16) ., ·:, ·,#r ,,:,,,,)lw-:f :,,,'., ,rt••. '.r0.:'::'i.: ". , , \. · Under tlie e,x;pited,!Agreeritent· 0vertime must be offeredfto,,Qa:ptairis·,or•, · Inspectors onira:i!ierti!!>rlty.:•basis, ?.The··Employer contendsithis':lin:tits-.,effe'ctive· '·. -: 


· supervision as.for:example·,where there may have, been•.a::,homieide requfo:ing the call-in of a. Captain· and the City would be required .to ·callc,in ~the most senior Captain·• rather than -the homicide Captalll. Similarly, if there is a special situation in a particular district and the overti:me·involvement ofthe Inspector is required; -the City cannot call-in the Inspector from-that,district unless he/she coincidently happens to be the most senior Inspector;· Rather, the City is required to offer the overtime to the senior Inspector from another District in the .City who will not subsequently be involved. with the pro_blem. 
The Union protests, stating that it has gon_e to arbitration several times to enforce the relevant provision in the expired Agreement and· claims that Buffalo has yet to pay the grievant, a command officer, pursuant-to the.last 
. award. The Union charges the City Proposal would serve to give the. Commissioner ofPolice total discretion in awarding overtime. It insists the provision which 1:he City proposes to . change has been in the CBA since at least July I, I 986 and it ensures th~t senior officers, if available, are given the first opportunity to work available overtime --a fair and workable 
-
33 


procedure. The more important assurance, it elaborates, is that it thwarts 
Commissioners from rewarding friends to the detriment ofothers. 
We find the City's logicto be compelling. Relying upon seniority as a sole and absolute standard for assigning senior officers; namely,, Captains :and·: Inspecrois .who ate,'the~-:depa.rtment's .functionaI\\>.chiefs; ™'1thtiu.ti,regard,it;o,,i , specialties and-regular assignments indisputablytlimped;es ~cient operation ­and weisupport the· City's proposal in principle. 1::r.A.ccordingly, the successor Agreement shall include1he following: i,. 


'.) Article •ll, Section 2.6 (1) 
. i­
<,". 
~,In th~ event the Commissioner-of Folice•,determines · ii! overtime is:, requir,ed for the .Chliif of ifDetectives, .· "'· -, ·,.i Professional:Standards Division-lnspe~tor, -Rrofessio:nal .:r.t' :, · ,17? Stand!alids :.Division Captain, ·. Ma:jor Gases Uriit . 
. : ;· :1.•Cap't~,; ot:i' •Na1•cotic 0aptafu,· in:ihithem~~pective,, ;,;;:;:i. l.'i-' ",Ci it,'{8S~ertts;ii the available:, o:vertini~ sli:~(1;\,be. ;first,, ,:,';;, I,, 
'.·,Jo:ffllts'etllitii said,dtulividual. Smd'indiliidu:tles~~shhllmbtt ;~a!-·\,.: ,r,. ·· "'· :,,;-beieligi:IHe fdr miy other·rank overtmie uril~sfa'Jl othe11i: ,:,.,h:·, , ·, . .c ..l,t•eligible..i.bidiwdtials, llave-:declined the dpp(irfunify> to1 ,; .\,,re:.,·, 
r,,-woi{ki!tlt~trove:r:t:imei•, ·t·• ., , -:' , -i-·"" . ,;;;:(,J,,n:·<'frri ,,:(:.• t~i:i,•, ..,,,: -~ . 
. Exce].Jt.'as'provided, above, in'the event of't}:te necessityk.· 'i ·:•; to rseplace ·a· Captain or·Inspector, the -most-·Senior:• officer, of the ranl< to he filled within the assignment, shalhbe given -the fi1•st opportunity to work overtime;-., an&< said ·opportllnity shall likewise .pass' :'througl:i.-'the 1 
·. applicable rank based on seniority. ,If the overtime is r ;. not ·accepted pursuant to this Section, the least-seni9r offii:er :within the applicable rank shall fill the vacancy. 
J 

The terms "in their respective assignments" and "within the assign1nent" are intended to lead to the distribution of overti»ze consistent with the 
following illustrative and non exclusive examples: . 
Wizen an overtime need aris_es related to a homicide, it should he assigned to the J,fajor Crimes Unit Captain; if related to a na1·cotics operation, tlze narcotics Captain should be assigned; iftlie assignment is 
-
0 
34 

} in "C" District, it shoitld be fzlled by the htspector in "C" District; if a meeting is called with citizens of"A" DistJ·ict to address concerns about a crime wave there, the "A" DistJ•ict htspector should be assigned. If "B" District is b1t.ilding a new headqu?TJ'fers, .the "B" District, Inspector should he assi'gned o.vertime.required to oite1ula 1neetiiig relating thereto . . 
0 


VI. Disposition of Other Rroposals before thesPaneh ;r ! ... i(, -!. . 
Deaih ,Benefit (PBA Proposal 2) 
The PBA proposes a substantial increase in the: $25,000 double indemnity life.insurance:.coverage· Award by a prior panel (Cugali) in the event of a Line ofDuty death.. ;. 
f •;. ·r: We find the provision in;:the :expirecl. Agreement to be reasonably comparable t6 prevailing practice ··elsewhere. :tWe d:ecline to support this". 
proposji.,( whic1i Would unnecessarily add to the Employ.er's-•cosf. burden;::. Th~,-. 
p,r.opoShl is·dtmiep;. :t:t;, :•.:._ v:·:·t.·. _~,r: ·•:it n'ti~"t:·ij_~; ~o;i.t ·-:., ·: ~-r.,t: 
•,:,,,,, .•,.Y.,·t· ,1.:,1e~T,,,.-.:,,tt-• ··l" ~ .. , ;-., ..1:" --.•.'.;.' -.,,,Vi,,,·~.~,_,:,·,1.:_,.··,·,i•.·.. ,.•,,r,.·.· .,...·.·.••.· .;,.·,t~•-.· ~­
-, -~·,-i.,-'!'1} ,-~.{~;.,}, • Ji-·,; :-•~ ,·,.. ,·--\ ~->-I:': ,, • /,' 
Shift Dilfe11;,tiid1'(.PBA'Pro'p'i,saJ.:3) '· :,: i'!i ,1i;,::1,~~·~it{ \lii:.kk .t,,1., t , ·, 

. ,The ·RBA proptise.s ,that ·the,:p'tesent night shiftiYdiffere)itia! o:fo16A:ents ·:pev, , n " hour 'b.e· inQteiised;itd.;6 percerit.,ofthe -hourly :rli.te. It,:atgues ~at,ithe:present:. . .. , ~­allowance 'hirs, b!\'ien -in effect since -1986, ·.and is ·clear-Iy defici~nti=;;JL'he•. City 
, · responds thatitlie"iNmon.;,Proposal would ad& \$725';0.0U::pe'r-:,;anrttii:rr·fu its , " costs. ·-··: •::-~--_,. ·:•_ ..,::f.·.-·.-;.(\. ·, . :-,-_. ·.,t_~--"· •----:~,--..· 


We find ·more generous shift differentials to be in effect elsew,here but in a period of austerity, we do not view this as a high priority.,item and are not• disposed to,addto·tli.eEmployer's cost burden. The pr.dposal is de:rtied. 

Vacations (PBA Proposal 4) The PBA proposes an j,ncrease in vacation time, and :t)lrther that employees. be permitted to take vacation in half-day units. It argues that Buffalo . officers cuITently receive substantially fewer vacation days than· do counterparts in Amherst and Cheektowaga. The City responds that Buffalo officers work a ten-hour· day on a 4-on/3-of:6'4-on/4-off cycle under which they may already take three scheduled off-days plus 4 vacation days plus 4 scheduled off-days, thereby enjoying 11 sequential days off the job, while drawing down only four vacation days. 
We find that other jurisdictions do provide longer vacation time. But we also find that Buffalo while lagging behind Rochester in early years, 
'.J 
35 


compares favorably in later years. In comparison with Syracuse, Buffalo Jags for the :first l O years, but surpasses thereafter. Moreover we find merit in the City's point that the ten-hour shifts and cycles results in an officer working approximately 195 days per year and:receiving,170 qays off from 
·workj; whereas people,working traditional eiglit-hour fiv:e-d~y,,weeks work ,,,260,,1days,-p.er year•·ru1d: recei;v.e•:.only 105 . .tlays!:.,off ./We,:aretipetsuadedc•that ."'· :· 
5Buffa:lo offi:~ersfenjoya distinet advantage: in r't;ll.at theyregeive 65 niore:,days off per year.than people working a more con:ventional.-eight-hour five-day· week,.• In 'light of that consideration and the City'si limited financial resources, we conclude this proposal should betlen_iedi 
• * 
Settlement ofDisputes (PBA Pi-oposal 5)-+ t The City urges that the Panel is barred :frdfu considering. this proposal purstilintto RERB Order 089; ii 1·1: . •.• 


The :Panel cohcurs and as noted earlier declines'\t? con~ider this proposal . . ;:; . :~}i~~-~·&1:.1 n~-i· ... _~\;-:_. :.t:. · ...--~7,:;~(--st~.-.-~;•..-· ·­.GroupLife,ilitswianfe)(RBA,Prop.9sal6)'{ ·,;p· ·'thii1...i/,,i.. 115 •·,;,· .,,:.:>:· ;x .·.. , 


-'Ilhis,j:iropo~iil(idlffe11i\:from:,\PBA Proposat'2, s:u,p~,'iitt\fth'at'iti:reliites''1l:> any ··, ·,·. r · ·· ,death~·but:,1B~A))!i'eli'e's ,upon,,kthe rsam'e :a:rguriieiJ.ts,;:ebi~l~yetl~itritp.erve-S:rliet ·,. :•. ,. !p'top6Sal..:i.;:~!:'~j1~hr~:1-.~1-:7/i. 1•:\;: ·::::;z:·· ;·:.';'• (. ·r :,4,\!f: . 1:~.1'.•,.'it~-:~,ir.H1 · ;':~t ·.::.:; -~·:f.:r,:: :.•:"·. 
t';·, ,v/·i•~•-·.:.~i·.\i:~-·-/.f~-.;., ·.l< ,if•·•·.·,I:·:: · -. ,'.':,'·: 1:.-1;*: ~:;.:.;•\·, _1r,:•,. ::.-: ·;: • ·~:: \, 

.'. The pan:eh' denies: this,ip:roposal ·on the· same,:basis-;,as,•m ·'diicase: •of;,PBA· 
..,...., ..·,;; ,,.,, •, •., ", ., ...,.· ,"

. Proposal 2... ,.. . ·-. -·· . 
Vacation hu:renients (PBA Proposal 7) 
The PBA,proposes that:an officer be.pennitted to -qifue vacation"days in five hour ·increments . and further that officers he provided,.the option of converting unused,,vacation time and personitl leave .time·to •sick leave accumulation. 

We deny the latter two on the basis that they were not discussed or debated in the hearing process, and we deny the· fonner on the basis that we have . already found the vacation provision not to be inadequate. 


Education Stipend (PBA Proposal 10) 
The PBA proposes eJs.1:ensive improvements in educational allowances on the basis ofcomparable practice. The City argues that this would add nominally $556,000 to its educational stipeJ1d costs, nearly doubling the present
l expenditure. 
() 

36 
The PaneL while believing education monies to be well spent, agrees that it 
) 
cannot support an increase in this item at a time ofausterity and the proposal is denied 

· Holida.ys (PBA Proposal 13,. Gty Proposal 6) · . , • ,f ,;, .The,:FIBA ptoposes,,iilbreasi:ng::the, 60 h'ours,,tir, ,holiday, pay:.;ptovidedi.1t1nder 

· the dkpire&'\Agreem·entto 120 hours per'annut'li,on th¢ bl:(sis ofcomparability withii·comparable ·communities. This benefit• was achieved· .in the Rabin Award which added· 12 hours of holiday pay, to prior practice. The City propb'ses revocation of the Rabin toward and\teverting to pay straight time for the designated holidays for employees orira_c_tive::-duty on the payroll at · the time ofthe specified holiday while exchiding entitlementi by persons on leavei:'of absence, suspension, or administrativ'e leave. Buffalo estimates it woulti savei $270,000 per:,: annum through Jidopti0n of its proposal. In propdsing-revocatio:n ofthe·Rabin panel's modi:fication,,the City is infeffeat propt)sing,.afrwage out· .The,,Union. on the otli'er hailt;l; in'· seeking additional 
:'#· · 
'··hours; is seilfiligani~dded,wa:ge.iiicreasei_-·.::, .,iir/) ?!i-,, ;:.~ '. •·•.· :,,:·i,· ·.;-, 1·;...~.1~i;~It,;.iJ .• .-·;'.·\ .:.,· i".J~ · ;1:• • -:~'). •·-?r.Ji-r<),· ,.. ,:t · >.: ,· ,::· . ,,.•·,·

·. W¢ -Jrave!~ai!H:e't:'addtessed'::iitld exbausted!l:the iWageft~iBtifudfatthisjunqtuife .·; · ... ' . ,. oeny'sbotbJ,i:fiil,it.l,'bs' pfoposalsr·;: , ::" · ; · ::i ,i,i~ ·'·;,.';'\i:i}J},?i+· :·;f;' ,, t!: .··.r, t"' :. ·' .f.'j::• '!:~'.}~::1;,(,:filtf:f ·?lf:• ;.-,.. .:.-;.~--·~·1'.°;·' <·-~.:.f.:: -~:~: :.-~ ·: :/:"·. Defense bf'Crbiiintd Cluzrges (PBA Proposal11:6)''';,: ,,,, ,,, •.,i1 ,, ,.,, ,•, · · •; , · 
, .. The •PBA},jil't!J'pastt:i" 'therrrdditioh· of a provisidtfc'~rtd~t;;Wl&i:chic.ian'.'offic"tir accused ofiengaging •.in criminal conduct that allegedly ioccut,recl in the course ofperformance of his/her duties and where thereafterthe-charges are favorably disposed of; shall be entitled to reimbursement for attorney fees, 
-disbursements and othenlitigation· expenses. The Gity opposes the proposal stating that could ,be very costly and that it would impede .the City's own investigatory procedures which would generally be involved in <reaching a decision to seek indictments. 
The Panel was initially, favorably disposed toward this proposal but, in executive session, concluded the matter was more complicated than initially understood. Furthermore, it presented potential administrative problems for which solutions were not readily apparent. This proposal is denied. 
Sick Leave Sell. Back (PBA Proposal 17) The PBA seeks to increase the number of unused sick leave days which an . l officer may sell back upon retire/.Tlent. It bases this proposal on cited prevailing comparable practice. The City opposes the proposal which, if 


-() 
37 


' i adopted, would allegedly more than triple the existing cost of sick le~ve buyback. 
The Panel views sick leave arrangements .to be insurance policies which en~ure employees.against salaried losses for~ specified total number of.days 


•·· .;when they;1arernnable to ;w,ork.due to il1ness•:•'i:1The J3inploy:e1ds a sel:f:iinsurer · and;)like ataY insurer,,; it does notanticipate tl;i~t eveii}' C!ilY.ered, in_di;vidual will -make a claim,,,let alone a maximum claim: Buyback practices-have evolved out,.of a desire to dissuade workers from abusing their entitlements and; regrettably; they have grown into a common.ptactic.e. But that does·not alter the+fact that a sick: day entitlement is not tlie equivalent of a vacation day 
. entitlement., Especially in .the present circum:stances:iwh~re we have bumped ·up againstithe limits ofability to pay, this proposal must be denied . .:.; j .·~ ~ 
Disability fRetirement (fB:A Pr.o,posal 19) t~ l! :c . i,,t .; 

.The:iPBAi:s seeking for allr:o:fficers granted a¢cidenta1 i;;etirement p.iitisuant,to .· •:,.the.::,~Socia:ki'S:.e.ourity•-f.provisions.: as a• •result,:·of disaliliijty:;:dnourrecLi.in :the. 

·,pei:forman,6:e,,iof duty;,• continued supplemental ·.ipay.ment&by ,the';,City,,,to.• , i· -:ir ·· ·;maiiitai:J-J;:j:FJtiiil'riie a1f:full salary and benefits until suo.n\ime·'.as1he/sh.e)i.tieaohesr, ·,_. 'j ,ii· · ··,mahdatorybise.iwiceltetiienient age. This:is a'ioene:fiti.)~njo.'¥e.dJby.,,B1:1£falo·J:?ire i .. • ut.SJ 
· Fighters'. and,the Urifow argues that its members shotildl'lite entitled tcrthe ..i • . 
same benefits, as,(;)ther-;jmblic safety employees. •ffhe-i0ityi.•feiterafus that: it ~cannot affottdito-pay,individiials,who are\hot workfii~,whett:it·isistniggling to-, ..·. , , pay curreqt offices. who a.re working their salaries·,•and•,bene:fits. · It•fr!rther urges that the State :Retirement .and Social Security programs":provide for accidental retirement, and that the City contributes significant sums to the Stat.e Pension Fun&todinance th9se protections. ·"" . ·,, .,,,,,. · 
. . 

) The Panel views sit as ,not entirely fair and probably unfair, to.-deny a police officer a benefit which the City provides an:d presumably recognizes to be justified, to firefighters. However, upon determining the pcitential cost ofthis benefit, we were dissuaded from a more tqorough review ofthe merits as we concluded the likely costs are substantial and irrespective of merit, place the provision out ofreach atthls time. 
Work Schedules (PBA Proposal 20) 
The PBA is seeking a changed work schedule through the implementation of a 4-011/4-off/ IO hour schedule. It argues that the City is refusing to increase pay and is proposing give-backs ~d that the officers therefore, shouid not have to continue to work the current schedule. The adoption ofthe proposed schedule would reduce annual work hours but, the Union contends, it would 
-
() 


38 

I I .have very little impact on the patrol district. The City disagrees that this ·would have very little impact, claiming that the adoption of the px:oposed · schedule would reduce the schedule workdays to about half ofthe days in a year. The employ~r contends the new schedule would add over $104,000 worth oflost time to the department's burden and would be the equivalent of 

, a.Josing 56 :full-tim;e o:fficer•S, · di';:., , .u;. ,, ,:,:, ~i.;d;;·. ,.-;,. i·i':,; ,.,, 
The Panel :first holds that .the Union's :fundamentaf.rationale is flawed as the officers are in fact receiving some added;1i:benefits and have been spared proposed·.,give-backs. Secondly while there J?:ay be some unproductive redundancy arising.in the existing scheduling arrangement,;,the answer in our vie.'w is t0;:find productive uses for that timeii:tThis proposahis· denied. 

Conferen.ees (PBA Proposal 21.) it· · .,;. n:;~ y :;•: 

The PBA,istates it::here se.eks to;Jormalize ar.i;_undelistanding.-it is supposed to ·,tt have1. in,effe~i! insofar-as:.1!.ri.otification,·provisions •,a:fu:ieoncerned. ~.,lf;he ,font! ,, fo~ "conferences.!/.,; refers 1 to ,,,supei:v.isory ,disdrissioµS!.;•,p'erha:ps; ,;box:dering;r·.on ,;;,:. dii!'ciplineiifurcktlter.Nitio'n,:asserts it, should be miitidii'i,tlrwitnini,2i4ib:cju.rs ;if· an : ,,;-. ·f.iit .•, offic-ei:,hii$•,b.e~n1foonfer.enced''.,aloilg with «;ietails:;itl;iii.mtwliat::tr'anspired;>:i·..:·, .... ; · dii1: · 'Fhe City,a.sserts .a conference is not considered it9,:hentdisciplinary,action:,·and i.ic. there is no oom.pellirrg,neerlforthe Unio.n t0,knowiof'.'2hy,1.kinference·within ; ,w· 
, 24·houf.stii1Moret1wet;;,theEmpl0yer maintains,••.thbtc:Fis,1101:ol';lmpelliiig-.reason ,·. •.·.·•,·• for notifying the, Union,,since there is no impediment to the·.affected officer doing so if he w:ishes·to invoke Union involvement.·· In fact;,:the Employer cla.ims, there may be ·instances where the member. chooses not to share this information with the1Union: .,. •:. .: ,.,,, 
) The· panel finds the . .City's argument that the affected• officer is free. to communicate information to his Union most persuasive, and the proposal is denied. 
Indemnification (PBA Proposal 23) 
This proposal is similar to PBA Proposal 16, Defense of Criminal Charges, but it here seeks reimbursement of PBA incurred costs. Proposal 16 has been denied and the present matter is disposed ofsimilarly. 
Messages (PBA Proposal 24) This proposal is for a provision barring the Department from internally publicizing pending disciplinary actions or circiilating information on actions taken against an officer except on a "need to know basis". The City 

(} 


C) 
C) 
,· .. ,,;,: 

;'.)r· )·: r . 

'.) 

_J 
1J 
39 
maintains the officer is already protected by New York State Civil Rights . Law ·section 50-(a), and that the City is legally bound to comply with that section. 
Inr,reviewing this matter; we conclude the,parties do not,trnly disagree .. We .thenefore :take:n6,:action;;011,this,proposal .,,r;:.;· ,1., •., .:,: .,., ,·,, :,,;:. ...,,... -:r, .,, 
Salaries andHours ofWork (City Proposal 1) •. The City Pl'.Oposes to change work schedules of the shifts· of ,each. of. 3 separate groups; namely,(l) Captains and Ip.spe?.tcirs;.,(2} Detectives, and (3) Personnel. assigned-to headquarters. In eacijcase it:s(;leks to convert.from. the 10, hour 4-3/4-4 :schedule. which requires li946.6 work hours per.,year over. 195 days to an 8-hour work day on a 5-2/5:,2/4-3 ·schedule which would also constitute 1946.6 workih0urs·per year but,,spread;.oVer 243 rathe:n,,than1-195 days. Iri;; each o~se,.. the':lEmployer argueSi;jhat the ·affectpd empltjyees:, are 
assignedi/;tOG'duties·,~whidli · regularly ,~equire thettt:'!itcr ·mteractri\"\!ith ,(',l.ther . agencies*.oi,.:;;comµiunity,,igroups working t,pe met:e;,typica:l. :dive'id!i.Y 8::<hour s(:h~dfrl.e~H:.lfrhefaot-Ithat-;they ate,on :duty when tli¢i~iat(}. liJ!l,;i.ble:itot.¢.bnta¢'1: .~'-.-.i, H and: w<!ir:fu,:,w,i;lih·these:iother.,,persons because:ithe)fa'"fei(oµ di!:ty,::al 1iinies, which ,-t ,. d1J1·,notric0oi;dinate with-,:the. conventional w.orkday.s;,rtsi,.saio !ta;, 6l'eate.delays ·.. ·, · · ,-~y, and ine:fficienciesr•·.'fhe\police personnel,·;canno:F effecti,velyi,-.be, ;deployed · wlientheir,eoli.tatits'i'Me'miravailable. · • , , ,i..-··,'frh,,1:r.·'~''•' •,ci\l<'•il;l.~t\\',1,; •.·. · 


We are.firml.y:inclined to support the City's proposalin•that we view,the implementation ,of i:inhanced productivity to be vital to the Jong-term · interests,ofboth parties. We haye proposed.adoption oftJ?.e:.City's proposal, contingent upon the, payment of a salary differential , to co;mpensate the · 

. affected employees· for reporting to work ort approximately 48: .more days per year than was required when worki~g the 10 hour schedule. We had proposed a 5 percent differential which the Employer rejected advising that it views any requirement for a differential to be unacceptable, but contends the · schedules i;hould be interchangeable without further salary considerations because both require the same number of work hours (1946.6) per year. Yet, the City in its opposition to PBA Proposal 4, Vacations, offered a most persuasive argument in asserting that the 10 hour schedule is a very valuable benefit as people working that schedule are required to report on only 195 days per year as opposed to 243 days as do people _working a normal 8 hour fiv!l-day schedule. Buffalo emphasized that 10 hour people can readily and repeatedly enjoy 13 sequential days off duty while having only 40 hours charged against their vacation entitlements, 
-
() 
' 
40­

However, in promoting its Proposal 1, the City denies that days work per· year should be the standard and proposes that the more rational standard should be hours worked. This is a complete reversal of its prior persu?sively argued rationale and we are constrained to conclude,that a petition to switch 
;personnel from the 10 hour schedule to l)::five-day 8 hou:ttschedule without >providing ,somiulifferential in i:eoognition,of the:diminished benefit must be,.: .denied: c 

Salaries and Hou,-s ofWo1·k (City Proposal 2) · 'f>he Cify is seeking contractual license to':a:djust:manpower levels four times per year where, it is currently restrictedffe.l:o malcing. such 'adjustments only• bnce per year. ,,:fhe City asserts it shouldibe able to·adjust manpower.levels. f0 account for seasonaLdemand like increased waterfront activity; in summer; , as well as to· make adjustments for retirements or illnessesnor injuries impacting ·a particular:rdistricl; or shift. -The City,,,emphasizes thati!iit pr(!poses 
,preservfug:,;,existing.. pro!,ledur.es such :~ th;e Traris(elf;i,Policy .andril;>rocedures . · .which,,;itakes-_·seniority.~i&nto·~ceount asi'>it iS••:siiekmgQi>,t)nl!Y ·,81'Jfreasenable, ·, :~pplicatioJ::i,ofits right1tmmanage the wor-#'force;,,11,'ifili.e;U:aron;\i;espQndsrthat ., ., ithe·exi~g!ipolicyllias,,beemiin effect since 199flfai:jti piib,videsr;fbr trtinsfeirs·-/• 
rfo"vatmrt,,pll)sitions'.t illhe,PBA contends0.1he E!icy.,i~rrho1ffonly., pl:i:lposiilg that:: ·-• i-biddi:ng;: cdiitin'.ue·1.to ,btibased 'Oll transfers .fun~Va:ilable, shifts;d:but::further' ,: .: proposes,'lliat;;fur,i0ther, :,than the· officeFS assignedh,te:l'A'•pafrol~,:,-sssignment · 
h. Id b' b d . . . ---' . ' . . · · ti" · ~1 d

.· s ou · ]',.,,.et'<' ·ai::;e :;,1·::ont1, 'semorrty, supew1sory,.-.,···llrpe11a: dnaiu<•··a:a. •. ·•career development factors as determined by the Commissioliei:;-Jt,contends :that for this latter group, seniority is not even a determining factor but one ofat least four factors;. including the non-specific supervisory, ·operatibnal and career development faetor.s. In effect, the Union. asserts that-the· Gity's is proposing to replace a senior.ity system which has been in place since 1967 with reliance upon.ithe Cl!ommissioner who cawthert exercise, preference and place friendly individuals into desirable positions and preferred. shifts. ·It further protests that the City is seeking to empower the Commissioner to adJust manpower ·1evels on all shifts. and · within all departmental units. The Commissioner, it argues, already is endowed with contractual power to 
adjust manpower levels more :frequently due to do exigent circumsf?nces. It charges that the City is now seeking latitude within which the Commissioner may adjust manpower and shifts to avoid overtime or other contractually required compensation such as court time pay. 
, I The panel supports the Union po~ition respecting this proposal. It does appear that the Commissioner is already empowered to adjust manpower levels to address exigent conditions and it does appear that the additional 


'P.tt?: ::{fe•t.; \'.' 



• 
41 


criteria which the City seeks to employ in determining qualification are
I 
subjective and very difficult to define on a reliable basis. City Proposal 2 is therefore denied 

,;;-Collr.t Time,(Qity Proposal 4) N' . . . . . . •It', ThecCity;,seek~ ~naptise aiminimum ·guarante.e of.twodi:i!>urisi.pefaappearance
0 

,.: instead of the four .hours provided in :the expired:Agreement._; It estimates 
this change would reduce the City's Court Time expense by. nearly half. .i That expense amounted to more than $32 million in .the 2000/01 fiscal year • .i,i The :City is proposing a minimum pay,:,of two hours ·,with the-. officer being 
C) .:·, paid"for.the actual time spent in court ifdt exceeds two hours..·What is.being ;, eliminated, ifrthe City's view, is the pay.that officers receive for not:.being:in .,1,. court as when an officier appears for 30f;minutes and continues,to receive pay ,,; for the· next-3 1/2 heurs after which he or she has left couz;t. The Uniori '.:, responds that Buffa16ls alli;>wances a.re:::already, subs1andard and that, there is · .;-:. 


itt no j.11Stification.forthe:,City,Proposal. ·4,l,. .•-.ii. ~i., :~, " . i'.,c, .i: .. :i.'f/ :;.... -:~~.t}tl~i-1:· "T~V:!f:~ ·,~:.\t. ::~!:~ ·:,.. ~i;•r! .;·. :';;~::r:r~;_1, ·j:~;1··;:t~!t. '.'.+~'.if:, ::~·;'. ::s1: We,fiild;;Bu:lifafo!~ @!i~rt Tjine,,paymenfs. to-b~~b.elow tliose;o:fitthe coiltiguoys ,,:;•, :.11,:.t}~ 


•,iii::. Towiis'®iW~lfra:s 1h6'se of'..'some:oities;;ithough't1JiniS:i:h Ri\'ic}lesteii!iandtS.yracuse ,,t . -~tit ·.(;} haii~'itliiee-h'b:uto:.mifti:fuunis;:, On,:balancte; we>coil;Q'lud:¢iil:he$u£1i'akhtlJowanoe' ,,,~: -:!.:,.. intth1:,-,eg_pireitl ·:Agre:eirient•.is not 11nreasonabfo,in~the1;~bnt¢xt,,oi6,comparable ,_:,~, ·.,, .. practice,iitnd•l•otli~Flttlleni'ents·-of• its compensitti0rl\1smicttii:e.:,";GJcinsequent1y 
;,.•.·. m__ ;:,.,.,,_.,.•...n.,r·....,po,s~_,,,·,·",·'.·,··•'s•-,·d·e'·n•-·1··e·d.· .:_. .., · ... ·.,...·,,.. . '".,. ~,,, ..,,.,. . ..
\:,i.,"'J' ..[' W c:t1 ~ 'I · .'· ' ·· 1'{_;":·,;-., ''j'.,1-;f .-..Jf;;!',•'~t,'~~j•;.f :'1"',.'1;f':·'.\':. .'''·," 



Perfect Attendance1n.centive (Uty ProposaI;7) ··. i': ·r1 The Employer pays a perfect attendance incentive •of eight hours pay for ·each, two,month;period of. perfect attendance commencing with July 1 of 
each' contract year. The City now proposes to pay •based on each three­' \ month period 0:1!\perfect attendance. Buffalo asserts,'it isi'.seeking to protect J _J -itselffrom payin'g an employee who is suspended, the eight hours pay for the 
three-month peri9d during which the suspension occurred. It justifies its 
. proposal on the basis that a person who has been suspended has made him/herself unavailable for work. due to misconduct and that individual therefore, should not be awarded a bonus for perfect attendance, 
Contrary to the City's claim that its objective is to avoid rewarding employees who may have been suspended, it clearly is also seeking to extend the prior qualifying period oftwo months to three months. The City has presented no evidence of failure ofthe existing system and we therefore deny this proposal. • 

() 

42 
Disciplinary Action (City Proposal 8) The City is seeking to modify Article XII, Discipline and Discharge, section 
12.1 which permits removal transfer or disciplinary penalties only where competency or misconduct, or the commission of a felony or ·crime 


in::volving. moral turpitude is involved and, then, only after·~ hearing upon .t 1·stated,,,chai;ges.;,cTil:ie.: pennissible . disciplinary .. aotien ·• urrder, ,the, .. expiredV't•:,:. agreement is a reprimand, amoneta;±:y .fin9· not to ,exceed,$100, ·suspension·:: not to.,exceed 60 days, demotion in grade or title, or.dismissal from service. ,,-. · The proposed revision would permit disciplinary action upon a showing of !1 misconduct essentially based upon due process and,J:ust cause. It would also i 
fa add disciplinary .options, including;. trans'fer,:11:ndlor changing shifts· and f 

probation.· The PBA argues that the current procedure has. been in effect ·ft,:· with· only.·one modification since the first negotiated GBA. and. that :the ,ii, Employer .continues to, enjoy substantial 'idisciplinary .power pursuant,. to 't Section 75 ofCjvr}iJSencice Law. The Union :further assertsillie clause irithe ,o:. 
.expit;iid agreement--Jaas ~rv.ed to ,wiili.l•only ai'ml.iiloi:¢hange :fut 3 5 .•;Years, ( . • ,i,, ha.virl'g.:been;cmodi:fled 0nly 'once by"th~ Br0SJ>~~,;P,anelA.wliffi wbrohigranted .~! th!e:~~o:lllira1 r;igJ:tti;to · appeal a 1deci$ion· byii:tlib.,;Cctminijssr-oi;ter t6::,cJiange a:hi 
:.:::-,:..:.~.: ;];lear,iilg ©.rn:6:oer's,&:dirig·by proceeding .fo.e:litbifyatMrii,witlii.n~sev@.n'Qa,lendar;j,, rf;ti:frr.-i~-~ 

·da,..V.g1•·~£(i· '1i.... ·~.,, ':,' ,.~.~ j,•t',:.",.:1••'·¾-.. ~,,J ' :. '":•• ;~ . ·:;1,;: ::·i.;\::.~it···•,;J:1-t( ··;S:i:: t: -;~l ..;'(;,)~p:~:t :.'.·i:i ·-~.\:" :. _:;' ·:,: .. "" -1 'J·· 9:;..,. . ,1:-,,; .......,.,!. ·l~~!~·,,;,;~ . .,,. •(· ~ .. · • ..,,, ··,··••,;.,,,:..•.• ..','.••.·.·..·'•.•... · ••'.••.·,•.•,,.·••·.•.••..·.•.:,..•.,· ',.,••.(..·-'i.',·'. .·.•.•~:.·f•.·:.',','':i.,, •·.·.. ,.:.,•..:•... •;.•.· •••'. .... ·.••·.'··
·.;,,,,>,-~: _::-;:;}~i./t i :.1id-\i~::;f ~:;h,fJ{._,.. -·n,:.-.. :".'. ·. ·:·-< . . · . . . ~ ~--. • Whe ·'l?'anel ,concludesi::fue, Employer has·\·•esbablishe'dc•a'-1>rleed' for more,,,, 
·;·':flexibility;,,butl~also,nbelieves that an, lnte'r:eSt!'.\Arbifrati:onkfliilieFis 'hefd, to·. '1, · making minimal' modifications. We therefore· decline to"idisestablish the Hearing Officer arrangement and substitute·empowefing the Commissioner , 


·to· act under a/Just cause" standard, subject to· rev.iewdn arbitration. We . . believe this matter is deserving •Of more thorough stud:>11 and that-.it is. likely ,the disciplinary options should be extended. However,• the workability. of , proposed :or available alternatives depends·upomhaving1.in place, an·e:fficient functio11.111g arbitration mechanism. As noted earlier herein, there prevails a , glaring absence of such a vehicle ·in thi~,jurisdiction, and we. are thei,-efore constrained to deny City Proposal 8. 

JJisciplinary·Action (City Proposal 9) 
This City proposal is concerned with procedures for imposing and appealing disciplinary actions. The City pleads that the current system simply takes too long, and by way of illustration cites the March 2, 2000 arrest of four narcotics officers by the FBI for a variety of different.charges which led to their suspension. The trial concluded two years later during which time the City was compelled to suspend the officers with pay. During that period one of the arrested officers retired, and one was acquitted in federal court but 
-
----=j 
() 
43 


remained suspended and is awaiting departmental charges. The remaining two were terminated pursuant to their felony .convictions. The two terminated officers were suspended for over two years during which period they received full pay. The City cites another case in which charges•. punishableiby discharge were levied on an o.fficei;: in:'1996 ~d d.id not! corned ·. to; hearillgtiuntihIDe:cember 20.00.. ,:,.After,11.the,iexpir,i,ttion-1,:0:fi:ihisdbrief.,:-i,nitiak,•:., &uspension:,-the,·officer was,,,p!aoed backl on, street patrol{ while awaitingd hearing. Thus, except for the briefs-suspension period, he was working for,:: four years , between charges and the disposition theiieof. · Buffalo maintains-e the existing system inefficiently selects a Hearing,Officer,and preserves thel::o least-desk-able parts ofboth, the Ci'!-il Service·LaY,t,•Section'75 and voluntar)'!ci atbitratiol:l.· -Buffalo proposes that these impediments should be .removed by."L the adoption of.·a-•.''.just,cause''•system wherein reco-gnizedvehicles such asr PERB panels, AAA panels, orFMGS panels are employed,expeditiously5to ..'!.: 
reach: just conclu~iions,,:,The Union:relies-upon its.u-esponse\<to Oity Proposal'.( 


.&tsupr.a...··1.-:: · :!.~~~\~'. t,;. -,,;~::, :,r,t,•· · .,;..: , t.iti. .t-·. :!';": 


t,WeJJi!anl31 too xeferences:.its·,respanse t(f2.iGity.. Piop0sali::&!r.amfatleniestCity.1,, '.o'\Rt6]PtJsal~9)~t.i~· }}\~~'-,:· 4( ··: ~-'••":!' ·.)~ .:-!)titi;l-'\i-'!'(-:·:. -f~ii -~·:,.:i€-i :1.t.:J::i-;,;:· .-:r?t.:-: ::: -~·:r·+ ~'.:;: 

·"-Unibii ReleaseJI'ime (City Proposal 10)">\ii,~;.t :(r, ,,,,,;t ,£fat-:• '11c·_. :i' -· •· , ,,.,,. <•!/fhe·"Gity11is'·-'preposii:tg,•to·•henceforth allow.•filll~titrie,,idetachecl,,duty ·fer the'-•'· 

.~,liJniozkptesiiilent-.-and' the first vice' pres"ident},.-aJ.id,,.,t01,funit,,,aI1'0thet paid· 
. release time, for union representatives to·a,maximu~n.-•ofl94:8 hours per year. Jt, argues, that under the expired agreement' the!,C\ity :is compelled to appropriate the equivalent of nominally three · full-time employees to . ·:ilivestigate and process ,grievances, attend meetings; aitd perform,other union , 'business,' It.pleads that the City can no, longer afford to retain officers who.· ' are .not ·-working, .claiming that. the cost of paid Union, time-off has been escalating ... 'The Union cites the Rabin Award which denied a prior City: 
. Proposal and. pronounced the provision. in the expired agreement sound, workable and free of abuse. The Union maintains the City has advanced no reason for disturbing the Rabin Award. 
We are in substantial agreement with the Union position respecting City Proposal 10, and therefore deny same. 
Printing ofContract (City Proposal 15) The Commissioner testified that an. updated agreement would facilitate the functioning of all concerned and Buffalo proposes that the parties agree to cooperate in compiling and printing a Contract'Agreement which 

::•,:t-, (1., -~ {.~r; ~-~-~-r;:t• .:•!;:r;-;-: 

•,.}._ t. 


-
() 
44 


incozporates all the provisions ofthe CBA up to and including the settlement ofthe current negotiation. The City further proposes that the cost ofprinting be divided equally between the City and the Union. They :further propose a -meeting procedure which must culminate in a mutually acceptable written 
document within three months. !fhe City seeks,, to . specify that! any ,,; 

0 · unresolved, 1,'cliffer-eh:ces,i•.,.about,·,.corttract language<1-.:,1shall,,r.,lie,:.,immediately .r,,• . su:bmitte~,to an arbitrator after:the expiration of.<the three-month period.' The :-'.1. Union' offers that ten years ago the parties unde1took to compile and print an up-to-date:Agreement and that the effort disintegrated; allegedly because the J City was deleting,provisions, moving provisions from one,ar.ticle to another .i and redacting language. It agrees.'1:4:ere is merit in:having ..a·comprehensive ,.c · documented· agreement; but believes, the City on its own-•initiative .should j draft the document,and present it to the Union for re.view and approval. The ..ti,, 

PBA rejects the proposa:1.--foi submittfu.g matters to an arbitrator, arguing,that '\; 
it is not an arbitrator's :function, to craft language which maji'J.change intents, ·.•:

0 
and asserts that differences about contractl$)guage areif6.r the.parties to ,1. resolve but addsi-tthat it-do(?s not foresee,1,a:-ijkelihood, o£'_ilanguage issues ,x, arisiri'g·.giv.en•tlte,,pa'st memoranda rutd paneh',aw:~rdsii: ,_. ,\i ,;,,;iitr . : .t<:,: :1: :,;~ :ot :., ~·\F.{'.::";"~t.:;:; !!ii:· .i• ~.ti· \',~•!1~J;;:. ;\~:.: ·.7. ·.· /~ '.:·;)j!;i;;-:\~~r ~~l{ •·. :,·;{-::i,::i\-· · .~.:;. '. . .. <' •. 


·The· Writet;, having1:wrestled these many weeks,;with;,numer,ous,documeri.ts in ,,,1 :repeated effot1:s io\deten:nine· -the substance,·ofthe\.:expired:,;A:greenient• and•,s:ii: · various, 111-ernb:randa·· 'imd ,arbitration awards-;i is,' acuteJy,,:'raware .o-JJ :the:,,.. 
··'itnpeditn~nts-:i(whitili: ,should be removed·.,:by;•,the:\•rdtaftttigbof",a:. ·coherent· ·C· Agreement. · We· ·believe it is incumben:t·,upon the Gity to compose and submit a .copy;ito•the Union· for discussion, ifnecessary; and approval. We view the submission ofthe issue before this ·Panel as being at least untimely in:the absence: of such • a recent prior. effort. It appears that much initial progress· could', be made ·by merely assembling a .compendium of changed and new· pr<;>:v.isions which have appeared in,,Memoranda of ,Agreement and/or Compulsory Interest Arbitration Awards since the last printing. 


VII. Award 
The undersigned, constituting the duly designated Compulsory Interest Arbitration Panel. with two mem_bers concurring and one dissenting, find and award as follows: 


-() 
45 
A. Salaries 
tJ 
1. Effective July 1, 2000, all salaries shall be increased 
.,
'2. Effective July 1, 2001, all·salaries shaJI beincreased .,,. by two and•one quarter(2 ¼%) pe1·cent , · ,, 


·~:: 
3. The following chart(page-,23 and: page 46} shall,be appended:\to the,Agree.mentf .\.: 

. ·•... 
) 




46 


) r 
tJ 
SALARIES F..FF'ECITVE 07-lll-2000 &07..0l-2001 
. ·: . :!.' ' ,•,' 
. 2.25¾·:i ,.HOUR:RATE 
.·• ~¼\\,.. ·. lf()URiRATE 07/D~IJQO ._, 07/DU:WO_O 
. ll7/lll/l001 
. 7llµ.llOOl . 
. . PPLICE l}Fl'ICER.$1'.EP 1 
$36,944 Sl8.!l7 
POLICE OF.FJ:CER_ST.EP 2 
$40,190 S20.S 
l'OIJCE OFJi'IcmtSTEP 3 
SG,442 $22.30 
544,419 

SZ2.BO POLlc:Ji: OFFJCERS'IEI' • 
$46,691 $23.!17 
S47,74i 
S?4.5I . J'ouc:Ji: ciFF.ICERST.li:P5 
$49,948 Sl!.114 
··· SS1;117l. 
$26.22 1 
:r.:
m,774'· S26.S8 
SS2,9J!I· 
,;•· 
553,!!Sil S:27.49 ! '
'.) 
I 
r 
.: ... ;-~_[_;_·__;,~/~~cnw·BER~ ·· ;·• · SS4,1Sl~ 
··::!:/, • ....~-,: ::;,~,::' ' 
·-)"':.: -:A~~{;.:·• ,$61,91.4 -· 

CHmF;O~ AI)r,i)N; S}ilW. . J & PO.LICE J!:!l!;I'Rt)'i:;n.>R. 

CHIEFOFHOMJCID&& S34.78 ·POLiCE·cAP'l'AIN 
Cl:!JEF OF DEIEcnvE& S:l7,43 : S74,551. .S311.27 POLICE ~$PECTOil8 

. 
_J 
Cl 
47 


B. Dental Insurance
i

" 
Article XXI, Section 21 .3 Dental Insurance 
Ai:nend 
par~grap~ 9p,e ~ read as foll~ws: '· 

0 Effl;!ctive:;June 30, 2002, ,the City shail pr'ovide; 
·at no cost to ·••the employee;, · GHI p1·eferred · Dental Coverage. • 
0 C. Prescription Drug Co-pay 
Add fourth. paragraph in::blue book (7/1/86-6/30/88),CBA tb'>:tead: .: . . ;/ 
_ Effectiv~;-Jwie· 30f ·2001, changes in .the ,c,fo:..pay.• 
,,-p1;escription ; drug requirementi•• ,ar~g. ~t . of ·,.:;, f int}iienimtati~n · of the three-tie.r:'p:rescr.ip1;iow,c6-pa~j· .· ,"' 
.··:·J;.': ;::i. It ,pr!)vis.i\)~~ by :the., HMO :(He~th J~'a,Dl(~'.(Jiince,•; .: .,,,:, .:. f.1r. 


'.t> Oi~ationt health care j>:rotiilers·Esfi{J'.U·?iffoi,th~. ·.·.·.· ·:,·, .·? i.'.' , •:i,espoll$lliilifjiiofitheifudiY.idualsiibscriliiiri,,; ci.iffi,i ;..,_;·;: : ·,, , 

',. ,·,.,:. .,.;.·.~ -1~w::.•.·•.,·.. ,.:-:-:•.1· ..-.,., .,.:-,,..,,._,. .• ,.·.,, r .• •.
,: ~-:~;.,;;:,.,.' ·•••..--.·•.,·.•.,·.·,·.:.•,.·.·•,·.,,.·..···.,: ,
,.::t:.~: ... :•·:~~ 
1
D. Arbitration,f>emand,,Relating to Univefa. Thtee-Tie1rPre-scnpti0h Drugs' ,. , · · 

· :·: .:·· •;·.-;·t/~·~\i·\~~i/tt.\1-Y•·•·:t·i ·•,. · ···-:;~(,~/;,,•/r\,'::,,:·\:••·.•,.... ; 
The ·PBA ·shail · withdraw its demand,• fo_r.:~a.Pbitration conce1·1ied · with po!!sible co-payment responsibilities of subscribers to the Univera HMO plan fordthe period conime~cing July 1, 2001 to June . 30,, ,2002 with 
.. adju~icatoty authority over that mattei··.beittg •ceded. to this Panel as a matter of retained jurisdiction. Retention shall be· for one calendar year following. the date of this . Awarq and if the matter is not resolved or submitted in that pel"iod of ti.me, it shail be conside1·ed to have been abandoned. 

()  '  ''  .  
48  
(')  i A  \ I  
E. Health Insurance Article XXJ.;,Setition 21.1  -.\..-.  . ,.,·  
,. Add the following provision:  
:  '.) . )  ( .  \ I  ')  ,:;. . .: ;)"•t;;: · ·.•. j',' >r;.; .· .. f . '.I.:.··.. •.  All employees hired on or after June 30,' 2ooi, shall pay twenty-five (25%):: percent of ,the . monthly premi1U1J,for the "core co:verage'' for individuals and, fifteen (15%) percent Qf the monthlyrpremi$1 for the . "cQie coverage" for · family cover.age. ~ft.Cor~ · i10V!.'rag¢I'. ist tmde1·stood to .. c'onsist ~,of :. th~i!'ileast ,~pensiv~ Medical fusurance Op~on acvai,la'ble,i~t th~· ::1. .ti:meiof1thire.!Ifa n~ hir~ elects\enr.olhlient. bt-ilne Qf;. tlilii,'.m.o'i.~) ex~ensive jilaris, he/Sh:e/wili'i.tdntr.iliitte. i#:.. '•: ,: . ) ,.,;ddi''ti'~:fr,;,.o·,:.the· for.eaoing ion·e ·h·un·•,!.:.;ed ···J!'l'OOP¾o?ti·•·· .,..,·,.·.,-~ . o •:.~.·1,1 _ ·,. · • e , : . ·_.1 ~ ,· . -·'\: :, • , • • 7.... ... ·· ., ·: percent\;1/of: the difforence between tile icost,.ofrthe: •selected"plan,a:nd the cost of'1co1·e •cove:raget?.,,.1 ,.).......,....,  .~-;-~;: ,,.,."  ·:•?,);;~ .·:_. ~x\·..­..  


Upon completion of four (4) years of servicei ,,with anmvei:sary dates being calculated on:the same.· basis as for longevity entitlements, an employee's,coverage · shaU become the same as for .employees,,hlred prior-. to June 30, 2002. 

F. Funeral Expense Fund 
Article XXXI-Funeral Expense .Fund 
The City and the PBA shall establish a Funeral Expense Fmid of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000) to be used to defray funeral expenses and dfrectly related costs which may be incurred in the interment or in paying respect to an officer killed in the line of duty. The City and the PBA shall contribute to the Fwuf with payments of twelfth thousand five 
' I I • 
49 


·hundred dollars ($12,500) each which Fwid shail be administered by the PBA. The money shall be maintained in a separate interest-beaiing account with the Police Credit Union. The PBA shail promptly advise. the City of any withdrawal from-the fund and 
() -shail pr.ovide; accounting-upon 1·equest•.. E:tj>,ended 
,.. funds shall be replenished by :the",City .. and,.the PBA with equal contributions, by each, within thirty (30) calendar .days following disbursement. Any dispute ­regar~g the -Fund shail be sub1nitted . to expedited arbitration. . , 

G; Longevity Allo.wance 
, ­
.-.. ), 
Article XXIIl(E):t:\Lon&'.evizy 

,-x.:vi:i · ·i •-~l· ~~-_.. . 1-~1..... • ·-~. 
;, r ,,-Ef(ectiv.e;,i.July,,fl, .2001, arr;Empl~yee wb.°9Yisi,-r~!fng~:on _.:;,~_ 

,,._ · •·:\)ti'!\ a'!!'l:eJl'etttfy_e d~te-prior to his/hei;ianmv~si:-i;yt:hiit~.-smdl , --r ;-'·,t> ,t 11ecei':vetlQI'ige@ty>payipr<hra.ted;.101i:,a nwnt.blyi,\~a~:~to -. ,,,, 1 .:• <r<--in..ti'e·calcril~:tedibymtiltiplying one!tw:elftlt!:(1112-itli:)i:i>f:•.the.~,, ,;;:,,, 1 

--, -·:·. tµIl:.;annual0Hentitlement_ by tlie: ,nliplber·.1\Qffrf!llly: , -_ co:mpleted,months of service conunencing,,mth:Jrls/her:, -anni;yeils.aty date and concluding,with theteffoctlve date -· ofretirement., -1 ., ;::•,ii-, r;, ­
H. Uniform-Maintenance 
' .... 
Article XIX, Section 19.1-Uniform, Equipment, and Maintenance 
Allowance· . -. ,-,

i ) 
19.1 Allqwance 
Effective July 1, 2001, the City shall pay an amtual








lj I 
uniform allowance of One Hundred and Fifty ($150) 

' 
Dollars. Such payments shall be made on or before 
September 30th of each yelll', 

() • I' ,. 
50 



I. Paychecks 
Article II, Section2.1 (G) 
Pay checks shall be delivei'ed with the :flap folded and · stapled,.: to:.:,conceal:. the :amount of .the, check· .and ... i; deductions and the nature-thereof. • • ,, 

J. Detailing 
The Rabin Panel Award respecting Detailing-shall be preserved• on: the exisfuig provisional basis,:;in the successo1••·Agreement. 
, ..b·
,•.-....,_..

'.) 
K :Overtime Proc~ures. Captains and Inspectors .·i:~f,':i_. 
.·<·~· J• -:~~I. ~::-.i-l }_);_'.\~U-f ·:.'.~:.' . • ,~.,.,: . :.•,.'·. ::.: t,.-:;!,:·:; j!i1tf 

Article II,.Bectioi:i.:,~6 (l}( ·. ·.. \:: ::_:.. :!:~·i .-:r::r}:· :~1;·:~~:;-/t;r. •· J·,: ·,·U ,;:.:~:t-( 1~:;'.i-~-: :.~f--., · 

", · · fu, tlie ·¢.vent:the· Commissione1·,.of Police·,detefmines dye~tinleifis: •required (or the Chief-i:of:JD.etectives, ·.. 
·, :• · Rrofessibri'al Standards Division Inspector ;.'!Professional ·,, Stillidards<' · Division ·Captain; .·· Majorr,:,,,,fJiis.~sj1,··Ufilt .· Captllin, ·, :or Narcotic Captain . in theil' •il,r-espective 

) assiglilllents, the available overtime , ·shall be: first offered to said individual. Said individual(s) shall not be eligible for any other rankovertime unless all other eligible individuals have declined the. opportunity to 
) work ,that overtinle. · 
Exc~pt as p1·ovided abo:ve, in.the event of the·nece~sity to 1·eplace a Captain or Inspector, the most senior officer, of the rank to be filled within the assignment, . shall be given the first opportunity to work over.time, and said opportunity shall likewise pass through the applicable rank based on seniority. If the overtime is not accepted pursuant to this Section, the least senior officer within the applicable rank shall fill the vacancy. 
j 
The following ancillary explanation of the intent of the above language shall.he included in the agreement as a 
I I I /I 
51 
footnote or appended and referenced in the body of the 
ti 
document. 
The terms IIin their respective assign.1nents!' and "witltin the assignntent" are intended to,1ead to the ·distiihution of .ove1iime consistent with tlie ·.,/ol/oww,.gJlbJi.fljgtive,@d non exelnsive l!Xainple~t,-. ,.,,i,.,.r ·-n,, . ,,: •,....,(/'.;,. 
w,Jten an overtime n.eed arises relo.ted to -a· !tomicide,•· it should ·be .assigned to the. Major Crimes .Unit Captain; ·if related tq it. narcotics ·operation, tlze,narcotics Captain -shoiild be assigned,· ifthe assignment is ,in "C" District, it should be filled hj the Inspector in "C" District; ifiz meeting is call.et! with citizens of "A" District tq address-concerns abo,it a· .crime wave there, tlie "A".District Inspector sko,ild he;-assigned. ]J' "B1' Distric(is buildi,zg ll;,new h.eadqu.arters;•-the "B," Dfstrict I1tspector-sho11ld be assigned (JVerlune-J'eqr,ired to 'attend t:i meetuig relating thereto. r· 



1
. ,.;,y: ~;; -~~~~ .->.:•~.:· ·-'X~~r·: ·,:.£::.-. . .~~:t ··>:--~~= :~;;~ .;,;JA:,r;\·. :?~­
. •-:i\li'J:iii _Pa,P.c,1'::pa.$;1~\llnsiq.ered and adi:lressed,;e'l:/~ry l)troi;bsali;,place:l:l befote: it by. ,J,the'.pal\f.iesl8~}(:-which are·,notdnclud!!;d--::,in th'e':1A:war:d Witre denied br .-,_,,:ideteJ/mmeJi!,i/.'b:,~:~g~_:;;ir:i'iproperly b,e-fore,,usi":for ·i.easons\3.eriumerated',i.iir the'·
J-'''

:-·.:c ··: ·,Opinioi:bS¢.¢.1'ioJ.J.',J>Jf;tbis.·docunient'.-, •· . L,,;,, 'J · ii, ,~i.:·'~ .,;; ,i,J,-h;_,,, ,.,-., 



Delmar,.,New York . Respectful]y submitted ·· September S ,2002 
'h
,. 

) 
;. State ofNewYork) · .,Srunner Shapiro ) Chairperson County ofAlbany) 

day of September, 2002 
RICHARD J. SCHAEFER Notary ~~~8~s~~bis~~;w Yor~oO G 
Qualified in Albany County Commission Expires Sept. 03, ­
. .. 
f:.,:i;_:1~; ;¥1,;,.• 

.-\ It ,:,,. 

......... SEp::05::02"rii1T fa':45 ........... iiiiFFALO..P'ilii" ............................ FAii"oo: ...8524228................................ii:"ij{ ............·.. · 

..... 
. '. 


PBA Designated Pan Member SUl;te ofNew York) , . Co1lCUrring,,-, ,... i9-..._,.,,;....9' ...-._; . ;.. "·-,·. ::. ,";-.:,,:.) ,,,,,
:J 

_County ofErie. ;, )
~:.: : ~ t{.i 
, :. 
S me this S M. day ofSe~ber, 2002 
,_,




r1.~2U-,:~ :;; -· 
' . 

'.) State ofNew Y6rk) Edv.itrd' G. Piwowarc~k, Esq. 
• ,J. ) 
City 'DesiJP18:ted Pan~fMeniber 
.:,....•

....... · · ·Coiility ofErl~ ) · · Disscnilil,g :r ;, ;;.. '"'',y · · 
Y;;::.· •;v_ ,J"..:°.;-.,-·:,~, ):Z: ;. :{~ :,~ifJ~i· !i{: • :,4·J· ':~\· }:; :;.f · ~-• ::--: :/:-"\'.~~·,• -::-A~ ' 
( ' . '. ..: . ·' :Swomto,m(;)\tln~/i:l '.i~i · day·ofSeptembei;\2002·•~~, ,,)~· ;•},>,'('.~i•.' r • /\) 
'•··· 
:r~;·~: ./:;', · ·1i1J.:t :i-."1::»". ·::?:/:~1t)~} ti/sf ,;. i.:•': 7. -'~r:.f· .
) . !-)--·


.. :-. 
·•'•.. 


. . •. ) . ' 

.'·• .. 
I••••• 
'•• . 


0 




III. 
0 
0 
",) 
1998 -2000 
I ) 
' 
' 


MEMORANDUM OF AGREEMENT 

The City of Buffalo ("City") and the Buffalo Police Benevolent Association ("PBA") 
hereby agree upon the following terms for a new collective bargaining agreement for the (} term July 1, 1998 to June 30, 2000. 
1. 
Increase base wages by 3.0% retroactive to July 1, 1998 (including retirees). 

2. 
Increase base wages by 3.0% retroactive to July 1, 1999 (including retirees). 

3. 
Article XXJII (Longevity) Amend Paragraph (A) as follows: 


(A) Effective July I, 1999, each permanent ) employee who has completed one (1) year of
) 
service shall receive annually, in addition to their salary, .one hundred and twenty-five dollars ($125) longevity payment for each completed year ofservice, to a maximum of twenty-five (25) years. f2./YJA 
4. All employees hired after 6~shall be required to contribute to the cost·of health insurance as follows: 
j ) 
a. 
Either of the two (2) lowest cost plans -No contribution; 

b. 
Employee shall be required to pay the full cost of the difference in premium cost between the second lowest cost plan and the higher cost plan selected by the officer. 


5. The City may change both shifts and scheduled work days/days off (including WV days, PL days, and vacations) for educational and training purposes as follows: 

a. Lieutenants -Supervisory Training as mandate9 by New York State; 
b. SWAT, HMT, URT, and Honor Guard for training exercises. All subject to ratification in its entirety by the Union and then approval by 
December 22, 1999 
FOR THE UNION FOR THE ClTI OF BUFFALO 
) ' \/ 560154.1
' ' 
) 

--l .----a J -_; 

SALARY AND WAGE SCHEDULE "C" EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 1998 
GRADE  STEP1  STEP2  STEP3  STEP4  STEPS  
1  35,079  38,161  41,249  44,334  47,426  
2  49,160  
·3  50,847  
4  51,417  
5  54,913  
6  58,788 ·  
7.  62,914  
a  69,230  

THE ABOVE SCHEDULE IS EFFECTIVE RETROACTIVE TO JULY 1, 199B 
These schedules are applicable to uniformed members of the Police Department -Local P.8.A. 
SALARY AND WAGE SCHEDULE "C" EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 1999 

GRADE STEP1 STEP2 STEP3 STEP4 STEPS 
1 36,131 39,306 42,486 45,664 48,849 2 50,635 3 52,372 ) 4 52,960 5 56,560 6 60,552 7 64,801 8 71,307 
THE ABOVE SCHEDULE IS EFFECTIVE RETROACTIVE TO JULY 1, 1~98 
These schedules are appllcable..to uniformed members of the Police Department-Local P.B.A. 
· Salsched.xls 

0 
IV.
0 . 
1996 -1998 

Rabin 
C) 
J 
' 
j 
JU 
State of New York Public Employment Relations Board 
Interest Arbitration between City of Buffalo 
() 
and Buffalo Police Benevolent Association No. IA96-035; M96-297 
Before: 
Robert J. Rabin, Public Member and Chairperson Edward G. Piwowarczyk, Employer Member Robert P. Meegan, Jr., Union Member 
Decision and Award of Panel 

This Interest Arbitration Panel was appointed on March 18, 1997. Pre-hearing briefs were filed, and evidence was taken and arguments presented at a hearing on July 1 and 2,-1997, in Buffalo, N.Y. The parties submitted post-hearing briefs at the end of August. The Panel members met in Executive Session on October 23, and subsequently exchanged positions in writing and by phone. 
Issues 
The primary issue in this dispute is economic. It is closely tied to several demands raised by the City for greater efficiencies and cost savings in the deployment
) 
of personnel, in the handling of disciplinary matters, and health insurance. The Panel will discuss the economic issues before turning to the demands pressed by the City. 
This dispute covers a two year contractual period of July 1, 1996 to June 30, 1998. The PBA seeks a salary increase of 6% in each year, or a cost of living adjustment plus 2% in each year~ The PBA also seeks a host of other economic improvements in areas that will be explained. The City proposes a salary freeze for both years. While it opposes a salary increase, it says that any increase awarded by the Panel must be tied to the cost saving resulting from its demands regarding 
1 
--~ 
; 
• 1 
() 
deployment, discipline and health insurance. 
n Economic Issues 
The economic data, particularly as set out in the City's pre-hearing brief at page 25-40, compares police salaries in Buffalo with those of several nearby jurisdictions used historically as comparisons, such as Amherst, Cheektowaga, Hamb1Jrg, Tonowanda and West Seneca, as well as Rochester, the closest large city. Whether 
() you look at the annual salary or the average hourly rates, the figures for 1996 and 1997 show that Buffalo police salaries are roughly equivalent to those in the comparison districts (tables at pages 37-39 of City brief). Since the Buffalo police officers have not had an increase for the last two years, for purposes of comparison the Panel assumed an aggregate 6% increase in the Buffalo police salaries for that period. With such an 
'.) adjustment, the hourly rate for the highest Buffalo patrol officer would be in line with those of the comparison districts in the nearby area (p. 39). The same adjustment would bring the highest police officer salary to $45,563, above the listed 1997 salaries in the comparison localities for 1997 (p. 38). 
The PBA points out that Buffalo police salaries have run a sporadic course over the last 15 or so years (p. 16 of PBA presentation of Joseph Madison), and that the increases in the last two years, 2% and 1%, were especially low. But while the aggregate increases over tJ,ese years may be slightly lower than the comparison districts, Buffalo salaries still wind up at or near the top of the comparison group. As the next section indicates, the City of Buffalo is not well off financially, and the comparison cities probably have stronger economic bases. For this reason, the Panel concludes that the salary of Buffalo police ofticers is competitive with the neighboring units. 
The PBA does not dispute the salary comparison, but argues that the true picture must take jnto account the total cpmpensation package, including such items as night shift differential, education pay differential, holidays and personal days, vacation allowances, uniform provisions and vision care. When all these figures are put together, Buffalo police lag about 6% behind their counterparts, as shown in the table at page 4 of the Madison presentation. The City does not dispute these figures as far
) 
as they go, but asserts they should be offset by'..tne additional income an officer receives in Buffalo from overtime and court duty, as well as by the savings to the officer of not having to contribute to any health insurance premiums. 
The Panel concludes that the most effective mode of comparison is to treat 
~ _/ salaries as one item, and other economic benefits as a separate item. The salary increase should keep pace with the increases in the comparison districts. The other economic items will be discussed separately. 
,~7 
2 
() 

Economic Constraints on the City 
The Taylor Law requires the Panel to consider "the interests and welfare of the public and the financial ability of the public employer to pay (Civil Service Law Sec. 209(4)(C)(v))." As the PBA correctly points out, the City does not plead inability to pay in this proceeding, nor, most likely, could it do so. But the facts do back up the City's 
0 assertion that it has only a limited ability to pay. 
The evidence shows that over the years the percentage of state aid has decreased, putting more and more of a burden on the property tax to carry the load of financing city operations. At the same time, residential property values are decreasing. 
0 Meanwhile, police and fire protection consume an increasingly large share of the municipal budget. This means the individual taxpayer pays more and more for this • vital service, and, with a relatively statie budget, receives fewer and fewer other services, such as street repair and maintenance. The City has room under its constitutional ceiling to increase property taxes, but the wisdom and fairness of such an 
0 increase is a different matter. As the City's budget director points out, as you raise taxes without improving services, residents realize they can get a better deal elsewhere. This creates an incentive for the better off to move, leaving behind those least able to afford to support the City and the most in need of its services. An indicator of the tax squeeze is that the City had to rely on a garbage user fee to take some of the pressure off the property tax. 
The City has enjoyed comfortable fund balances of up to $30 million in the past, but suffered through years when the fund balance dropped to $20 million in the hole. The current fund balance is a modest $10 million, much of which is already encumbered for other purposes than salary. Use of the fund balance is at best a one­time cure, for if it.is used to fund a salary increase it simply pushes the financial pressure into the next year. Recognition of the City's poor financial condition is found in the City's low bond ratings, which jeopardize its borrowing powers. 
The data suggests that some of the comparison cities, especially the smaller surrounding townships, have a stronger base cif..etonomic support. See Appendix IV, tab D, of City pre-hearing brief. 
The City points out that it has budgeted 3% for a salary increase for the first year of the agreement. But it contends that even with that budgeted amount, the funding of the full PBA proposed salary increase will take an additional tax increase of 4.3% (City post-hearing brief p. 51). The tax increase required to fund the full set of PBA economic demands is considerably higher, about 8.8%. 
3 

Current comparison settlements 
0 In the Panel's judgment, a salary increase is required if the Buffalo police officers are to remain in the comparison ballpark. This increase must be in the range .of the current settlements in the comparison area. The data on settlements for 1997 and 1998 is very thin. Further, it is not always possible to determine their true worth, for they don't always indicate what concessions and adjustments may have gone into 
0 the salary figure. 
The Panel concludes that current settlements are in the 3-4% range, including Amherst, Cheektowaga, Tonawanda and the State troopers. The City has settled with its blue and white collar workers for 3% annually for this period. 
The Public member agrees with the City that the amount of the salary increase. should depend in some part on the extent to which the City is able to gain cost savings through the other demands that it has placed on the table. The Public member also agrees with the PBA that the normal expectation of a public employee is that a 
0 substantial salary increase is needed to compensate for the removal of a valuable existing contract right. · 
However, when the Panel met in executive concession, the PBA strongly opposed those demands tnat might result in significant cost savings. The validity of the City's demands and of the PBA's opposition to them will be discussed in a subsequent section of this decision. Suffice it to say that as a result of the discussions 

· in executive session it became apparent that the opportunities for cost savings through these approaches were limited. 
Since the Panel award will not result in the magnitude of cost savings hoped for at the outset, the salary award will be in tj,e middle of the 3-4% range. The salary increase will be 3~5% of the base salary for each year of the agreement. 
The City has budgeted 3% to cover the costs of an increase for one of the years 
) in question. The balance of the cost must be met through other budget savings, or, if necessary, through tax increases. But given th~City's estimate of the salary increase that would be required to fund the PBA's full set of demands, if any tax increase is necessary to fund this more limited award, it should be modest. 
Other economic adjustments 
In his initial correspondence with the other Panel members, the Chair indicated that some adjustment should be made for other economic benefits where Buffalo officers are behind the norm. The PBA Panel representative indicated the priority of 
4 
A
\._ ./ 
() 

: -l
' •. __) 
_J 
its demands. Based on this, and on the relative significance of the items in question, 
the Panel awards as follows: 
1. 
Optical insurance. This is a benefit enjoyed in several comparison units, and is of major importance to the membership. The annual cost of this benefit is about $75,000. This benefit is administered through the PBA, and under this award the City shall reimburse the PBA for this paymenl 

2. 
Holidays. Officers are somewhat behind their counterparts in this area, though the shortfall is offset by the fewer work hours assigned. The holiday benefit, which now calls for 48 hours of annual holiday pay, should be increased by 12 hours. 

3. 
All holiday pay should be prorated upon retirement. 


While there may be merit to some of the other fringe demands, only a limited economic adjustment can be made, given the economic circumstances. 
As a practical matter, these benefits, for the most part, cannot be implemented retroactively. The changes in the agreement that will result in cost savings to the City can be realized prospectively only. The panel concludes that the most equitable and expedient resolution is to make the cost saving changes and fringe benefit improvements on a prospe_ctive basis only. With respect to the fringe benefits, this means that: 
1. 
For the calendar year 1998 and thiireafter, the City shall pay $75,000 for the annual cost of optical insurance. 

2. 
The 12 hour increase in holiday pay shall be in effect for the calendar year 1998 and thereafter. 


.
-
3. The holiday pay proration for retirees shall be in effect for the calendar year 1998 and thereafter. 
City demands that would result in cost savings 
Seniority 
The City made a number of demands that would give it greater flexibility in making assignments. The Commissioner testified persuasively that in a modem, effective police force, he needs tb be able to place the best people in key positions. The PBA strongly opposed these demands, which it sees as dangerously jeopardizing the traditional role of seniority in the assignment of officers. In executive session the City winnowed its demands to four, all of which it deems essential. 
5 
() 
The basic seniority provision in the current contract (Section 12.2. of City's version) says that: 

''The department recognizes the importance of seniority in filling vacancies and shall make every effort to adhere to this policy, provided the senior applicant has the ability and qualifications to perform the work involved." 
0 The existing provision is not crystal clear, since the "make every effort" clause may give the City some leeway to depart from seniority, and because there is a core requirement ef "ability and qualifications" before the applicant may invoke seniority. This open-endedness may invite litigation. However, the numerous awards submitted by the PBA tend to uphold the senior bidder in almost all contested cases, suggesting 
0 that the principle of seniority is fairly clear. 
Command officers 
Two of the City's demands cover the City's command and investigative positions 
0 (Inspectors, certain Captains, Lieutel")ants, Detectives, Detective Sergeants, and officers assigned to Specia_l Units). One such demand would permit the City to make overtime assignments within this grouping on the basis of qualifications, training, experience, job responsibilities and seniority. It says "if the other considerations are demonstrably equal, the most senior employee should be offered the overtime 
'.) opportunity." 
The other City demand would allow the City to make and change permanent assignments of officers in these positions on the same basis as the assignment of overtime, that is, with seniority governing assignments only if the other considerations are "demonstrably equal." 
. 
l' 
In the Public member's judgment, ·in the long run the City should be permitted to take into account an officer's qualifications for a key assignment, and where those qualifications are demonstrably superior, they should be allowed to trump seniority. In a labor relations climate of trust, appropriate language would protect the principle of seniority, and would insure that departures from.seniority are based solely on demonstrable merit, and not on favoritism. In executive session the Public member proposed language that would require the Commissioner to give great weight to seniority, but would allow him to consider other objective and demonstrable factors that measure ability for the job. In other words; the burden would be on the City to depart from seniority, while under the City's proposal it is the other way around. The Public member also suggested that this departure from the current language should initially 
apply only to a small group of officers. 
6 
() 
The PBA continued to object even to these more modest proposals. The primary basis for its resistance is its claim that historically promotions in Buffalo have been based on political factors and favoritism. As a result, the PBA has been forced to spend considerable money to protect its contractual rights through arbitration. The PBA submitted a packet of arbitration awards that it claims show that the City is not honoring the present contract language. Without repeating the details of these awards, it is sufficient to state that the language of some of the arbitrators shows that there is a real problem of trust. 

0 The PBA's objections are significant. First, the parties will get nowhere with a marked departure from the current principles of seniority unless there is a better climate of trust. The new language demanded by the City may very well lead to an increase in the already large volume of arbitral litigation about seniorit>', and that is not good for 
0 labor relations or for saving money. 
Second, interest arbitration is an essentially conservative process. Substantial changes should come about as the result of give and take at the bargaining table. The parties have a much greater familiarity with the history of this issue and its potential pitfalls than any third party can gain through this brief proceeding. An imposed award could do more harm than good. Nor is an arbitrator in a position to determine whether and to what extent acceptance of the demand requires additional compensation in the economic package. These.are matters better resolved at the bargaining table. 
) While the award does not incorporate the City's demands, the Public member suggests that now that the City has narrowed down its demands, this provides a good beginning for constructive discussions in the upcoming negotiations. Until the parties come up with solutions that permit greater flexibility in deployment, the economic settlement will not be at the higher end of the range. There has to be some incentive for the PBA to work constructively with the City towards meeting a mutual need. 
All officers 
The City placed two other demands on the table in executive session that affect all officers, not just those in command positions. 
Detailing for educational purposes -
This demand would allow the City to 
"detail an officer, regardless of senio;ity, from one shift to another for educational and/or training purposes." 
The City points out that under current practice the training programs are usually offered 
) 
7 
on the day shift. This means that an officer on any other shift not only gets overtime for the shift in which he is trained, but may be too fatigued, after serving the earlier shift, to get the most out of his training. 

.,,,. The City's concern is legitimate. Its proposed language would allow it to offer training on a more rational basis, without running into overtime costs. This demand does not jeopardize the larger principle of seniority, and the potential for problems is
[ 
limited, given that it is confined to training and education. 
Other detailing 
The second City demand, as framed during the Panel discussions, allows the City to 
,0 "detail an officer between Districts within the same shift by inverse order of seniority within that officer's district." 
Under an existing agreement, the City has the right to detail officers to cover short term absences. The language provides: 
"The parties agree that the Department shall have the right to detail officers of any rank on the basis of seniority. Detailing may be used by the Department to cover for short term absences such as personal leave, 
) vacation time, sickness, blood days, etc. It shall be the intent of the Department to detail on a shift by shift basis and within the officer's division." 
The parties advise that in addition the City has the right, in emergency situations, to 
reassign officers within their shift even without regard to senicrity. 
-~ 
In its presentation in the interest arbitration, the City gave several grounds for its various proposals on detailing. Neither the specific language of its proposals, nor their actual impact on the members of the bargaining unit, was discussed in much detail in the arbitration, though, as agreed during the arbitration hearing, this was addressed by the Panel members in their correspondence. ·__,.. 
As the Panel understands it, the City seeks the right to make these changes in _j advance of an emergency, and for a broader array of reasons than now permitted .') under the contract. It asserts that its proposal will save some overtime costs, as officers from a lighter district maybe moved to cover needs in a heavier district. 
The PBA strongly opposes these proposed changes. The PBA is concerned that the City will not use this provision in good faith, but will make wholesale, long term 
8 
-
-j 
transfers that undermine the assignments officers have obtained through seniority. The PBA says that if the City can readily transfer employees, it will not face up to the pressing need to hire more officers to meet the City's overall law enforcement obligations. 

The Public member agrees with the City that-it should be allowed greater flexibility in making these assignments. These proposals do not jeopardize the larger principle of seniority that the PBA has assiduously protected. The City contends in its 
(} brief that most of the comparison jurisdictions have greater flexibility than Buffalo in deploying its officers. A review of the contracts submitted in evidence indicates that for the most part this is so, particularly in view of the managements' rights clauses in several of these agreements. A recent interest arbitration award for the City of Rochester (Selchick, 1995) recognizes the need for greater flexibility in the deployment 
C) of police personnel as we enter the 21st century. 
At the same time, the Public member concludes that the City's rights in this regard should be specifically limited and defined. As with the other City deployment demands, a lack of mutual trust prevents a constructive approach to greater flexibility in detailing. Further, this is another area better suited to resolution at the bargaining table than through interest arbitration. Therefore the award supports only limited changes in this area. 
The Panel does not agree that the City should have the absolute right, as asserted in its initial demand quoted above, to detail officers from one District to another. Rather, the City's right to detail between districts should be limited to two specific situations: 

1. 
To cover short term absences. 

2. 
To cover specific events, such as sporting events, concerts, demonstrations and the like, as represented in the City's pre and· post-arbitration briefs. 


In order to insure that these assignments are temporary and meet specific needs, detailing on this basis may not exceed 15 working days. 
) 
Further, the language should recognize the current practice of allowing senior officers to accept the assignments on a voluntary basis. 
To accomplish these objectives, the Panel awards the following language change: ' · 
"The City may detail officers of any rank between Districts within the same 
9 
shift by inverse order of seniority within that officer's district for the following: 

1. To cover short term absences such as personal leave, vacation time, sickness, blood days, etc. 
2. To cover specific events, such as sporting events, concerts, demonstrations and the like. 
0 This detailing may not exceed 15 working days 
Except in cases of emergency, the City shall offer the assignment to 
another District to officers in seniority order. In the event that the 
assignment is not voluntarily accepted, the least senior officer (s) shall be 
0 assigned to the other District. 
This language is to be viewed as a provisional solution to the problem. The parties may monitor the City's utilization of these provisions and propose changes and modifications in the upcoming negotiations. In any future interest arbitration, the panel should consider the parties' experience with this language. 
Health Insurance 
The City proposes significant relief in its health insurance costs. The City presently pays 100% of the costs of health insurance coverage for all employees in the unit. The data shows a variety of patterns in comparison districts, with some officers paying for a portion of their health insurance costs. As a result, Buffalo police officers enjoy a substantially greater benefit than officers in some comparable units. Further, the City asserts that it needs savings in this area to fund a salary increase. 
As a preliminary matter, the PBA 9ontends this matter is not properly before the Panel. However, the Panel observes that the City had placed a demand for relief in health insurance costs on the table. That proposal has been modified, but the modification is not more burdensome on the employees, nor does it chang., the basic nature of the demand. Hence the Panel concludes it has the authority to deal with this
) 
~a ~ 
rhe City proposes to approach this issue in a way that it says is relatively easy for officers to absorb. The City is willing to continue to pay the full premiums for both single and family coverage for the two current plans, l:loth HMO's, that presently have the lowest premium costs. It proposes that covered officers then pay the full amount of the difference between those premiums and the premiums of the more expensive plan the officer chooses. If an officer does not want to pay this additional premium, he may 

10 
elect the less expensive plan. The City saves money by not having to pay the full premium costs of the more expensive plan. The City points out that the majority of the employees have chosen the less expensive HMO plans, indicating they are competitive with the more expensive plans. 

While the proposal has appeal, there are obstacles to it. 
First, the cost of the choice is high. The numbers in the City's brief (p. 38) show 
() 
it could cost an officer more than $1,200 for a single plan and over $2,200 for a family 
. plan. The officer who wants to remain with the current plan has to pay an enormous premium -the equivalent of perhaps a 5% pay increase --just to maintain his current coverage. This becomes a very expensive give back. 
Second, because there has not been a lot of discussion at the bargaining table, the PBA has not been in a position to assess the benefits of the various plans. The · best solution would be for the City to persuade the PBA at the bargaining table that all the members will have adequate coverage under the less expensive plans. 
Third, there is no control over the less expensive plans. If they prove to be inadequate, officers may be forced into the more expensive plans. In executive session the City proposed to correct this risk by agreeing to take any savings resulting from a cut back of benefits and puJchasing new benefits with them. 
The Panel concludes that the City's proposal has merit because more officers will have an incentive to move into the less expensive-plans. However, it does not take an additional charge of over $2,000 to encourage an officer to change plans. In the Panel's judgment, a much more modest premium differential should be enough to persuade the officer to move to the less expensive plan, if the benefits are relatively 
CJ similar, as the City contends. 
The Panel concludes that an officer should be required to pay 25% of the differential between the premium of the second lowest of the lowest two plans and the higher cost plan ne elects, for single coverage, and 15% of the· differential for the family plan. 
While the Panel cannot be confident that this differential will move a substantial number of employees out of the more expensive plans, this determination is at least a start in the direction of greater cost savings in health insurance plans. The experience in the next few months should give the parties a better data base if they revisit this issue in the next round of negotiations. 
The City should make this change during an open enrollment period as soon as practicable after this Award is finalized. 
11 
.. 
Disciplinary matters 
A third area in which the City seeks relief that may result in cost savings is in the 
Q handling of disciplinary matters. As matters now stand, the City may not terminate an employee or suspend him for more than 30 days without affording the officer a hearing. The present provision calls for the hearing to be before a hearing officer, with the costs borne completely by the City. 
The City asks for the right to discipline an employee without any prior hearing, with the employee having the right to challenge that discipline through arbitration. The PBA raises substantial objections to this proposal. .,. 
First, the PBA argues that requiring officers to give up their statutory and constitutional rights to a pre-discipline hearing should only come about through voluntary agreement by the union, and not through an imposed award. Whether or not this position is mandated by the Constitution, it reflects a solid principle for interest arbitration. The Public member views interest arbitration as an inherently conservative process, in which significant changes should whenever possible be made at the bargaining table. In the wake of the concern over the Gilmer case and the general waiver of statutory rights, the Public member is reluctant to impose a new procedure on the parties. 

Second, the PBA points out that the use of arbitration will impose significant costs on its treasury, as the PBA will have to share in the costs of the proceedings. This means officers must now pay, through their union dues, for the right to challenge disciplinary matters. 
The Public member sees no problem with the City imposing discipline prior to hearing if it does not result in suspension or termination. In these cases, the individual's rights_are adequately prese~ed through a hearing after the discipline is imposed. But even here the shifting of these challenges to arbitration hits the PBA's treasury. The Public member made some suggestions to the panel members for ways of resolving these cases without immediate arbitration, with the PBA reducing its objections to writing, and saving adjudication for a later day, if and when the officer is suspended or discharged. However, the parties...were unable to come to agreement on this. The Panel makes no change on this issue. The Public member observes that this is another area that deserves intensive discussion in collective bargaining. 
Other City Demands ' 
The City had a several other demands on deployment of officers on the table, including the changing of rotations. These demands were subordinated to the four that the City pressed in executive session, and no further award is made in this area. 
12 
The City also demanded a reduction in union release time, which currently involves as many as three union officials who devote their full time to labor relations matters. There should be no change in the current system. The system works, and 
G there is no evidence of abuse. This is a large unit, with complex labor relations issues, and cutting back on union service may actually make relationships worse. 
Indemnification 
() The PBA made a demand for indemnification where an officer is acquitted after he defends a criminal charge tha_t arises in the line of duty. The demand is generated by an actual r-ecent situation. By law, the City is required to indemnify officers in civil matters. 
While the demand may appear to be equitable, further investigation in executive session reveals that this is a safeguard that is rarely found in collective agreements. . And when it does appear, there are some preconditions to its usage. Following the precept that interest arbitration is not the place to pioneer contractual provisions, the Panel does not grant the PBA's demand. 
Dated: 
December t{: 1997 

Robert P. Meegan, Jr., Union Member 
13 

STATE OF NEW YORK ) COUNTY OF t}!f/01/04c;,f ) ss.: 

On this Z2-day of December, 1997, before me personally came and appeared Robert J. Rabin, to me known and known to me to be the individual described in the foregoing Instrument, and he acknowledged to me that he executed the same. 
a 
JAMES K. WEEKS 
Kotary Public, the Sl. a/ New York Q~alili•d in Onon. Co. Vo, 463WO
'.) 
1y Comm,ss10n Exp. Meo/ '!l,,.':7••1 
STATE OF NEW YORK ) COUNTY OF ) ss..: 
On this 2. 3 day of December, 1997, before me personally came and appeared Edward G. Piwowarczyk, to me known and known to me to be the individual described in the foregoing Instrument, and he acknowledged to me that he executed the same. 
5, -?. {}.;k_ 
Notary Public 
SEAN P. BEITER Notary PubTic, Siata of New York Oualirfed In Erle County 
Commission Expires Oeo., 11, lqq 'o
STATE OF NEW YORK ) COUNTY OF ) ss.: 
On this day of December, ~997, before me personally came and appeared Robert P. Meegan, to me known and known to me to be the ihdividual described in the foregoing Instrument, and he acknowledged to me that he executed the same.
) 
Notary Public 
14 
n 
() 
V. 

1995 -1996 Cugalj 

STATE OF NEW YORK PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS BOARD CASE: IA 95-020; M95-165 
* * * 

In The Matter of Interest Arbitration between 
* 
CITY OF BUFFALO (j, -and -* BUFFALO POLICE BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION 

* * * 
APPEARANCES 
\) I )
~l,r the PBA 
W. James Schwan, Esq., Spokesman Joseph J. Madison, Economic Consultant, Witness 
AWARD 
0 F 
A R B I T R A T I O N AND 0 P I N I O N 
Edward Fennell, Government Finance Consultant, Witness J John Juszkiewicz, PBA 1st Vice President, Witness 
James F.Cudney, PBA Recording Secretary, Witness 
For the City 
Peter J. Hurtgen, Esq., Spokesman James N. Schmit, Esq. Spokesman Honorable Anthony Masiello, Mayor, Witness Barbara Slominski, Ass' t. Director of Labor Relations, Witness James B. Milroy, Director of Budget, Witness Joseph J. Tanzella, Commissioner of Assessment {retired), Witness 
For the Panel 
Samuel Cugalj, Chairman and Public Panel Member :,m J. Stocker, Public Employer Panel Member : .~rt P. Meegan, Jr., Employee Organization Panel Member 

BACKGROUND 
The City of Buffalo ("CITY"), located in Western New York state, is the second largest city· in the state with an estimated population of 328,100. The Buffalo Police Benevolent Association 
' 
("PBA") represents approximately nine hundred (900) sworn police 
personnel in the CITY, excluding the Commissioner and three (3) 
Deputy Commissioners. This bargaining unit includes police 
officers, detectives, assistant dispatchers, police photographers, 
detective sergeants, lieutenants, captains, inspectors, among 
others. 
Their three (3) year Collective Bargaining Agreement expired on June 30, 1995. The PBA submitted its proposals for a successor 

agreement on or about January 17, 1995. Pursuant to Article XXVI 
of their now expired collective bargaining agreement, when one party submits contract proposals to the other party, the latter has 
thirty  (30)  days  from  said  receipt  in  which  to  submit  its  
proposals.  Thereafter,  the  parties  must  meet  and  commence  
negotiations  within  thirty  (30) days for  a  successor  collective  

bargaining agreement. On February 17, 1995, the PBA filed a class action grievance protesting the CITY's failure to timely submit its contract proposals under Article XXVI. 
The CITY' s Director of Labor Relations position was vacant from early December 1994 through February 21, 1995. On or about February 28, 1995, the CITY offered its contract proposals to the 
2 
PBA which the latter rejected as being untimely. No negotiation sessions were held. On March 7; 1995, the PBA filed a Declaration of Impasse with the New York State Public Employment Relations Board (PERB) . The parties, thereafter, agreed to submit the above referenced class action grievance to expedited arbitration before

0 
Arbitrator Eischen. On June 30, 1995, this Arbitrator ruled: 
"1. The City of Buflalo did violate the 1992-95 Coller.tive Bargaining Agreement when it ailed to submit its proposals to modify that cQntract by
0 
February 17, 1995. 
2. As a consequence of the City's failure to submit its prcposals in a timely manner, it may not compel negotiations on its February 27, 1995 proposals for modifying the 1992-95 agreement. 
3·. Negotiations for changes, if any, in the provisions of the 1992-95 Agreement shall commence forthwith on the basis of the proposals submitted by the PBA. under date of January 16, 1995.# 
(Referenced Joint E.xhibit 1,21 
The Eischen Award was confirmed in State Supreme Court on August 
) 28, 1995. On July 27 and 31, 1995 the PBA again requested mediation services from PERB, and mediation sessions were held with a State Mediator on August 23 and September 6. No progress was 
; ) 
reported. The PBA filed a Petition for Interest Arbitration on September 11, 1995, and on October 12 PERB designated this three 
(3) member Public Arbitration Panel to resolve their impasse. Hearings were held in Buffalo, New York on December 27 and 28, 1995 and on January 23 ,_ 1996. A stenographic record of the proceedings was made available to Panel members. The· Panel met in Executive Session on November 28 and prior to the Hearing on December 27 to discuss the impact of the Eischen Arbitration Award and the Taylor Law's procedural requirements. The Panel determined the CITY was 
3 
CJ 
precluded from presenting its proposals for "at least" the first 
() year because of (al the Eischen Award, which the Panel had no jurisdiction to alter, and (b) the CITY did not submit its proposals to PERB in its 9/26/95 response to the Interest Arbitration Petition as required unde+ Section 205. 5 (b) of the Taylor Law. The CITY disagreed with the Panel's determination. The Panel also directed the parties to brief the issue of a one (1) or 
C) two (2) year award herein. 
At the Hearings, the Panel received extensive material including Hearing Briefs, seven (7) Joint Exhibits, five (5) CITY and ten (10) PBA Exhibits. The parties were given full opportunity to present argument in support of their positions on the open items, introduce evidence and witnesses, and to engage in their·· 
) 
examination and cross-examination. They were given the opportunity to file Post Hearing Briefs and bqth were postmarked by the agreed upon date of March 5. 
Panel members independently reviewed the Exhibits and Hearing transcripts extensively, then met in Executive Sessions on March 4, 19, 21, 25 and 28. The Panel fully discussed the merits of their arguments, the. evidence submitted, and structured this AWARD in view of satisfying·Section 209.4 (iii through vi) of the Taylor Law as follows: 
"Iv) the public arbitration panel shall make a just and reasonable determination 
the matters in dispute. In arriving at such determination, the panel shall 
specify the basis for its findings, taking into consideration, in addition to any 
other relevant factors, the following: 
a. comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of the employment of the employees involved in the arbitration proceeding with the wages, hours, and conditions of employment of other employees performing similar secvices or requiring similar skills under ~imilar working conditions and with other employees generally in public arld private employment in comparable communities; 
4 

b. 
the interest and welfare of the public and the financial ability of the public employer to pay; 

c. 
comparison of peculiarities in regard to other trades or professions, including specifically, Ill hazards of employment; {21 physical qualifications; 


131 educational qualifications; (41 mental qualifications; CS) job training skills. 
d, the terms of collective agreements negotiated between the parties in the past 
providing for compensation and fringe benefits, including, but not limited to, the 
provisions of salary, insurance and retirP.ment benP.fits, medical and 
hospitalization benefits, paid time off, and job security.
0 
(vi) the determination of the public arbitration panel shall be final and binding upon the parties for the period prescribed by the panel, but ln no event shall ,such period exceed two years from the termination date of any previous collective bargaining or if there is no previous collective bargaining agreement then for a period not to exceed two years from the date of determination by the panel4 Such determination shall not be subject to the appro•1al of ;Jny local legislative body Qt other municipal authority."
0 

AWARD 
ISSUE -ARTICLE XXVI (Term of Contract) 
The te:r:m of this Agreement shall be from 7/1/95 through () ) 
6/30/96. 
ISSUE 1 -ARTICLE II, SECTION 2.1, (Salary) 
a) Effective 7/1/95, the 1994-95 wage schedule shall be 
increased by two (2%) percent. 
Effective 1/1/96, the wage schedule in effect on this 
date shall be increased by one (1%) percent. 
5 

ISSUE 3 -ARTICLE II, SECTION 2.~l, (Night Shift Differential) 
DEMAND DENIED.  
0  ISSUE 5  -ARTICLE XI,  SECTION 11.l  (b)  (Settlement of Disputes)'  
DEMAND DENIED.  
() ) )  ISSUE 6 -ARTICLE XX, (Group Life Insurance) A) A $25,000 payment upon the death of the insured; B) An additional $25,000 payment if the cause of death is accidental; C) A maximum payment of $10,000 for limb dismemberment according to a schedule of payments in the current policy providing this coverage. DJ A $5,000 payment upon the death of the current spouse; E) A $2,500 payment upon the death of each dependent child from age fourteen (14) days to age nineteen (19)years, or to age twenty-three (23) for a full time student. F) A waiver of premium and conversion privilege. These changes are to be effective May l, 1996 if this insurance coverage is not put out for competitive bid, or June l, 1996 if coverage is put out for bid.  
ISSUE 7  -ARTICLE XXI,  SECTION 21.7,  (Health and Dental Coverage)  

 DEMAND DENIED.  
6  


ISSUE-a -ARTICLE XXIII, (Longevity) 
Amend Paragraph (A) as follows: 
(A) Effective July 1, 1995, each permanent employee who has completed one (1) year of service shall receive annually, in addition to their salary, seventy-five 
($75) longevity payment for each completed year of
() 
service, to a maximum of twenty-five (25) years. 
(Note -There is no change in sub-sections (B), (C) and (D). 
'.) ISSUE 10 -Education Incentive -(New) 
DEMAND DENIED. 
ISSUE 11 -ARTICLE XIX, (Uniforms and Equipment) 
DEMAND DENIED.
) 
ISSUE 13 -ARTICLE III, SECTION 3.2 (Holiday Pay) 
DEMAND DENIED. 
INCLUDED AS PART OF THIS AWARD ARE "ADDENDUM A", SUBMITTED BY THE EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION REPRESENTATIVE, AND A DISSENTING OPINION F.ILED BY THE EMPLOYER REPRESENTATIVE. 
ALL OTHER ISSUES AND DEMANDS BROUGHT UP AS PART OF THESE 
NEGOTIATIONS ARE HEREBY CONSIDERED NULL AND VOID FOR THE 
TERM OF THIS AGREEMENT. 
7 
, 
STATE OF NEW YORK COUNTY ·OF ERIE ss: 
() 
On this ,;L,5'7# day of April 1996, before me personally came and appeared Samuel Cugalj, to me known and known to me to be the individual described in, and who executed the foregoing instrument, 
and 
he~c:;wl geJ·me that he executed the same. 

S L CUGALJ 7C_.,__,-:>f~~
Public Panel Member d Chairman 
Concurs 
KAREN R. KOVACE'/ICNOTARY PUBLIC, State of New Yost Qualified in Eriu County •• J,.
My Commission E:(pires .?./J~Y.r 
STATE OF NEW YORK ) COUNTY OF ERIE l ss: 
() 
On this day of April 1996, before me personally came and appeared Norman J. Stocker, to me known and known to me to be the individual described in, and who executed the foregoing instrument, and he acknowledged to me that he executed the same. 
) :!~~'°'R~ C!.d;<A J· em,'-11~ 
Employer Panel Member 
CAROLJ.CM
Dissents IICWIYl'UllLIC.s,,.o.:rxorimr10111: CU>U!ED IN ER!E COllljl)'_-, Jn ~ MY COMMISSION~o 
STATE OF NEW YORK ) COUNTY OF ERIE I ss: 
'l rrli
On this (71 J day of April 1996, before me personally came and appeared Robert P. Meegan, Jr, , to me known and known to me to be 
J the described and executed foregoing
Kr
individual in, who the he ackn edged to me that he executed the same.
and 
ROBERT P. 
Employee ~1~zctf/L, ~, Concurs 
MARIETTA ADYMY Notary Pllillk:. S-Clf fMW Ya1'
8 a ::r1111 Ene Cau!!I! ,,..qg
~C'W?I lar ........-.:;...;;'0 .... 
': ) 
CH:~IRMAN'S OPINION 

In determining the preceding AWARD, the Panel did take into account its statutory responsibilities under Section 209.4 of the Taylor Law. For each issue, the , discussion below summarizes
0 
the positions of the parties and the Panel's rationale. 
ISSUE -ARTICLE XXVI, (Term of Contract) 
The PBA sought a two ( 2) year agreernent. They argued that 
0 
since the inception of the Taylor Law, every negotiated or interest arbitration award involving this bargaining unit has been for at least two (2) years. The PBA' s initial propo,,al to the CITY in 
) 
these negotiations was a two (2) year proposal. Furthel:lllore, the PBA believes the Eischen Award precluded the CITY from advancing its proposals for a two (2) year period. 
The CITY' s position is that a one (1) year AWA.t."".0 is most appropriate. They argue that there is a need for the pcrties to return to the bargaining table as soon as possible, becausa there are critical issues the CITY needs to discuss with the PBA. A two {2) year award would put off these critical discussions foI. an additional year, placing additional and unnecessary strain on CITY finances and operations. They interpret the Eischen Award a::.: 
9 
denyi_ng the CITY from compelling negotiations on their proposals () for one (1) year. 
A Panel's majority gave greater weight to the need to return to the bargaining table as soon as. possible. This is more consistent with the intent of the Taylor Law emphasizing collective bargaining. It is also in the public interest to encourage collective bargaining, where possible, on mutual needs and problems. The CITY' s oversight in its untimely response to the PBA's initial proposals should not result in a windfall for the PBA by denying the CITY' s proposals for two (2) years. Buffalo, and other municipalities, are undergoing budgetary problems for a variety of reasons. These problems impacts their operations and 
) bargaining units, and to deny the CITY access to collective bargaining for two (2) years is overly harsh. On the other hand, the CITY cannot realistically expect a windfall in terms of having no change in wages/benefits for the PBA. Effective police services ~re critical to the CITY' s quality of life. The maintenance of quality police services stem from a motivated police force. A Panel majority believes it has struck a balance between the competing objectives of the parties. 
j 
10 

ISSUE 1 -ARTICLE II, SECTION 2.1 (Salary) 
The ~ sought wage increases equal to the cost of living index change plus two (2%), or a six (6%) wage schedule increase, whichever is higher, in each of two <?> years. Their comparable communities include the Towns of Amherst, Cheektowaga, Hamburg, Tonawanda and West Seneca, and the City of Rochester. They believe PBA wages are $2,200 to $4,400, on average, below these comparisons. Furthermore, it takes police offers 5 years to reach the maximum wage, while comparable communities take 3.3 years. 
'.) The PBA argues the CITY is not filling bargaining unit positions being vacated. The result is a decrease from one thousand forty-one (1,041) police officers in 1988 to current staffing of eight hundred ninety-five (895), directly impacting productivity of the bargaining unit. Meantime, they point out that civilians in the department increased from one hundred thirteen 

(113) to one hundred thirty-four (134). 
The PBA counters the CITY' s claim of an inability to pay. They believe Federal aid has increased annually since 1991, and between 1992-94, State aid increased from $57.l million to $ 63 . 7 million. However, this is a reality the CITY shares with most communities in the state, including the comparison communities. The PBA believes the CITY's property tax base is not as depressed as alleged, by showing there has been a fifty (50%) increase in the CITY' s total assessed valuation over the last ten 
11 
() 
f} 
0 
() 
() 
1 ' ) 
(10) year period. The PBA discounts the CITY' s predictions of budgetary shortfalls by showing a pattern of similar claims by CITY officials in the past, only to be followed by a positive end-of­fiscal year fund balance. 
The f_!IT offers no salary increase. They argue they are unable to pay such increases because of declining State aid, continuing budget deficits, and declining property tax base. Not only is the property base declining, but forty-five (45%) of CITY property is tax exempt. The CITY depends on property tax revenue to a greater extent than Rochester and Syracuse because the latter two share greater county sales tax revenue. While Buffalo is at 80.2% of its constitutional tax limit, Rochester at 68.3%, and Syracuse at 51.1% of its taxing limit. They argue Buffalo is forced to rely more on property t_axes than Rochester and Syracuse 
because  it receives less sales  tax revenue.  Median  1989 household  
income  in  the  CITY  is  $18,482,  Rochester  reported  $22,785  and  
Syracuse at  $21,242.  

The CITY's list of comparable communities includes the towns of Amherst, Cheektowaga, Tonawanda and the cities of Rochester, Syracuse, Niagara ·Falls, and the Erie County Sheriff's Department. The 1994-95 average base wage for PBA members is $42,979, and including other cash payments increases the average to $53,528. The CITY believes these averages compare favorably with their comparison group. The maximum base salary in Amherst is $39,679, 
12 
Cheektowaga $42,229, Tonawanda $38,625, Rochester $41,753, Syracuse 
..
() $36,484. The CITY maintains PBA-base salaries increased ninety-two 
0  and six-tenths (92.6%) from 1986-95, while the cumulative CPI  
increased thirty-seven and nine-tenths (37.9%).  
As to the staffing argument of the PBA, the CITY argues they  
().  
work within their budget, maintaining a ninety-eight (98%) vacancy  
control rate. From 1984-85, all other departments in the CITY  
'.)  experienced a decline of approximately twenty-four (24%) in the  
number of employees, while the PBA has experienced a decline of  
approximately five (5%). The increase in the numbers of civilians  
0  in the department is compensating for the reduction of PBA  
personnel as recommended in the report, Policing Buffalo in the  
Nineties, submitted by the International Association of Police  
Chiefs ("IAPC") . The CITY argues that their population has  
declined four and six-tenths (4.6%) since the 1990 census. They  
believe crime statistics have shown a more favorable, declining  
pattern.  
The Panel recommends using the same wage comparison group  
recommended by the Prosper Interest Arbitration Panel in 1992,  
i.e., the cities . of Rochester and Syracuse, and the Towns of  
Amherst, Cheektowaga and Tonawanda. That Panel's rationale is  
still meaningful and its use provides continuity. Excluding the  
Town of Tonawanda, which has not settled its 1995 police  
negotiations, a comparison of total annual pay (base, longevity,  
13  

shift differential, etc.) shows that at Step 5, Buffalo is $3,100 
() below Rochester, and $3,300 below the comparison group average. At Step 21, Buffalo is $4,104 below Rochester, and $4,185 below the group average. 1995 wage settlements for the comparison group averaged 3.67% (mean) and 4.08% (medi~n). Justification for the 
o· 
wage improvement in this AWARD clearly exits, but is tempered by overall CITY finances. 
The work load for police officers has not lightened. While the decrease in the number of police officers is less than the decrease of other CITY department personnel, fewer police officers and continuing high incidents of crime also provide meaningful justification for the changes awarded herein. Latest available crime statistics show a modest decrease in total crime incidents from 1992 to 1993, but the change is too modest to be meaningful; Crime remains high and exceeds Ro.chester and Syracuse levels. The public's identification of crime as one of its top concern is not surprising. This concern supports the CITY' s need to maintain a police force which is highly motivated, trained and responsive to 
the needs of this coromunity. The CITY relied heavily on State Aid in the past, and there is 
little argument that recent trends are not encouraging for the CITY (and other communities). From 1991-95, State aid decreased 19.6%, and Federal aid increased 0.8%. 
To its credit, the CITY has been persistent in continuing to encourage housing and retail development. Major new 
14 

C1 
J 
----, 
home _construction is advancing in many neighborhoods, and more than 
1,000 new homes are planned (Prospectus). From fiscal year ending 
6/30/94, taxable property increased $8.3 million (State Comptroller 
Report). Full valuation increased from a 1993-94 fiscal year 
reassessment of $6.8 billion to $7.B billion for 1995-96 
(Prospectus). While not reflecting dynamic growth, it does reflect modest growth in property values. 
"In recent years, sales tax revenue in the Buffalo area has grown at a higher rate than the rest of the State due to the increase o-f Canadian trade and Western New York shopping" (Prospectus). Earlier this year, it was reported that the CITY's portion of 1995 County Sales Tax revenue was $50 million, an increase of approximately $800,000 over anticipated revenue. The City School District received $25 million, separate from the CITY's share. 
The Panel took note of the CITY' s showing that cumulative police wage increases have outpaced the cumulative CPI over a ten 
(10) year period. However, this data must be tempered by the starti.·.g point 10 years ago. More importantly, though, is how police w,ges comp~re presently. 
Some ?udgetary data presented by parties represents a snapshot in time, as funds are routinely transferred to and from accounts in the normal cc ·1rse of business. With that in mind, it is noted that the CITY t-'lid $2. 3 million less for the PBA' s 1995-96 pension 
15 

costs. than were budgeted. Unreserved/undesignated funds in the lbudget were estimated between ·$1 million -$2. 9 million. The 
current budget funded 919 officers, while staffing is at 898. No increase in staffing is planned for this budgetary year. Finally, the wherewithal for funding the AWARD can be realized by canceling other unnecessary expenditures that need not be made or by reallocation of budget lines and expenditures. It is acknowledged that some police budget accounts exceed funded amounts, but these are subject to management's control. However, strong budgetary/financial controls by CITY officials resulted in positive general fund balances of $10 million (6/30/95), $13.3 million (6/30/94) and $7 million (6/30/93). A Panel majority was encouraged by this pattern. This AWARD will not disturb this regularity. While the financial environment is challenging, the CITY has the wherewithal to fund .this AWARD. It is very much in the public interest to maintain a motivated police force, and the 
) 
changes herein are important to that desired objective. 
The change in wages is an effective two and one-half (2.5%), with an estimated cost of $986,715. Nith the FICA roll-up approximately $75,484, the combined increased cost is 2.69%. The CPI for the Buffalo area was 2.9%. 
) 
16 
ISSUE  6  -ARTICLE XX,  (Group Life Insurance)  
()  The~ seeks to improve current life insurance coverage for police officers from $5,000 to $50,000; an additional $50,000 for accidental death; spouse coverage from $5,000 to $10,000; child insurance from $1,000 to $5,000; and $10,000 for limb dismemberment.  
0  The CITY's pleads  an inability to pay.  
'.}  A Panel majority believes the PBA were not competitive in this area. Given the nature of police work, the forward cost of this benefit, and modest cost for benefits received, the AWARD is a needed improvement. Estimated cost is $76,571, or 0.19% of payroll. Competitive bidding should be effective in keeping the additional cost to a minimum.  
7  ISSUE 8  -ARTICLE XXIII,  (Longevity)  
)  The PBA seeks to improve its current longevity schedule adding a new step Gne (1) full year of service at $100.00. The CITY'S position is an inability to pay.  by  
I---,  A Panel majority supported a reduced longevity improvement from the original PBA dern~nd because they were not competitive with  
17  

the comparison group. After six (6) years, Buffalo police officers 
c=) received $275 less annually, .and by the twentieth (20) year, Buffalo was $320 less than the comparison group. Additional cost of this change improvement is estimated at $383,285, or 0.97% of payroll. 
0 
OTHER DEMANDS 
0 
The following demands were also presented to the Public Arbitration Panel by the PBA, and were examined, evaluated and denied: Night Shift Differential, Settlement of Disputes, Optical
0 
Plan-New, Education Incentive, Uniforms and Equipment, Holiday Pay. 
While some of these demands had merit, overall it was inappropriate 
!) ( \ 
,__ , I to include them as part of this 
April 25, 1996 
SAMUEL CUGALJ 
Buffalo, New York CHAIRMAN AND PUBIC :.ANEL MEMBER 
cc: Richard A. Curreri, Director of Conciliation, PERB Charles Leonard, Supervising Mediator, Buffalo PERE 
STATE OF NEW YORK 
COUNTY OF ERIE 
r, samu~l cugalj, do hereby affirm upon my oath as Arbitrator, that I am the individual described in and who executed the enclosed instrument, as Chairman of this Interest Arbitration 
:J Panel, on April 25, 1996. 


18 
ADDENDUM "A" 
Hour Rale 
1'/, 
Hour Rate 
2'!. 
7/1/95 
1/1196 
1/1/96
7/1/95 
16.32 Police Officer Step 2 
31,792.18
Police Officer Step 1 
31,477.40 
16.16 
17.75 
Police Officer Step 3 
34,586.17
17.58
34,243.74 
1s·.oo 
19.19
37,385.24
37,015.09 
20.63 
Police Officer Step 5 
40,180.94
Police Officer Step 4 
20.42
39,783.11 
42,983.35 
22.07 Detective 
21.85
42,557.78 
44,554.49 

22.87 (Assist. Radio 
22.65
44,113.36 
46,083.52 
23.66 Dispatcher & Police Photographer) 
Detective Sergeant 
23.42
45,627.25 
46,599.93
46,138.55 
23.69 
23.92 (Police Lieutenant & 
49,276.30 
25.30 
49,769.07 
25.55 Polygraph Examiner) · 
'Assist.Chief of 
53,281,36
52,753.82 
27.08 
27.35 
.
Detectives, Chief of 
Administrative Serv., 
& Police Instructor) 
(Chief Homicide & 
56,456.14 
28.98 
57,020.70 
29.27 Police Captain) 
(Chief of Detectives, 
62,123.75 
31.69 
62,744.99 
32.21 & Police Inspectors) 

r;~-~~, 
·-c_ .• 
~
r"" ~ 
e-(1j, e 0 '"-.../ 0 u 
-, "'r ~.. 

VI. 1992· ~ 1995 





Contract Settlement 
0 '.) 

J
C 
1 

• 
() ' :· . ·::..:.coNTRACT·~iiLEi(iENT BETWEEN 
BUFFALO POLICE. BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION, 'INC·:.· 
·: ;: ·.,...>:·.·< · . · ... ·AND:THE· · :. 

, ::··,:-_. . CITYOF·BfrFFALO . '., ..·.·...~-:: ;t\:; .,:_'•-.:.·· 

l.J : l\GREEMENT Dl\T]JB: July_ii 1992 thru June JO, 1995 
' 
2): ·.. Yl:llt!EB( 
: .. 
f
•oii~{;;;· -... 
2% ncross"-tlie.:.baarci incr.ease. rolled. into· the:. 
base • 
..! 10. 5% r8p0r.l:.ing. time based on annual· so.J.0.ry.' 
effective OG/J0/92 rolled in the base, 
2% one'ti~e·productivlty stipend paid bas~~ on. base.. pay: as.of July l, 1993.
C) 

2% . acros~:,:the-b.oard increase rolled into the'. 
base-. 
5% across-the-botird increase rolled' into t_he\1 


base. 
.., 
. ' t •·. ., 
3) :: ,;-l!OllETl\RY Cl\LCULl\TIONB; ·,:::>·: 
. ~­

of,/.tcie the. annual salary by the, number:. 
of .;.regular ·. hours in the work· year.: 
calculation of hourly rates. cons~stant; 
with hours worlced.per year· and the._FLSl\ •.'" 
. . . .. . . liourly. t~ te will be us.ad for ·cal.culat:l.o·~·, 
of: all payments,-except overtime, such:: as·:court 'l'ime . 
2) ·overtime nota -.i~~J;{~ r~te plus add-ons such ns shift···. ·dirferential times 1 1/2. 
/.'·J) -: Twenty-six (26) eguai' paycheclcs .. 
'. 
~;,;..:.;· . . ·-· . .' . ·,... 
··_..·... 




() 4)" :·1roun~ OF l!onrc,. ;:;:'\?-:: 
.1) :· -~he regular hoJ;;_":'.i,'f>ci~iJ.y worlc shall be consecutive:. · . .except for inte.rru.ptions foi ·lunch a 

2 ):! : ,, tl~it memb~rs. ·· ...·~•h1;1{\ ·. b~· assigned to the fol_lowing · ;Schedules: 
•.·. ·"!· 
Unit Members -We ricing in Precincts and conSoliarite"c}.
Divisions; 
·'' =:~ _;" 
. 4 (on), J"~·.\of:i:(' 'followed by 4 (on) , .3 . (offj';·,followed by·: _4· ·.-. (ciri) ·, · 4 (off) ten (10) hour·, schedule·, (4'-'J,:'.4.:.J,· 4-4, (10)). 
() . . . .·• ..:.: •, .. . . . . . ' .. .)
(b) Other Units;·,· hl.l. other unit titles ·not addresisei:l above_, includlng but not limited to Special "Frauds, 
·correspondence,. and-Extradition, Internal Affo.irs,. 
l\dministration and the Detective Dureau (detectives : · not working in Precincts or consolidated divisions); 
shall work · a.-;. 5-2·, 5-2,. 5-2, 5-2, 4-J, e hour.· ··,•schedulea . ·' . 
'IJnolementa'tfob: ~ ·:_Ifflplementation of the, 4-3·; 4-:3, ·:i:.._ 4, tan (10) ,hour·,;schedule, and the (s-2)4-, 4-3',· 
eight (B) hour.schedule. shall .occur not ·J:ater than 
three (J). montl\s_ following ratification, · 
.. (c) schedule as og·o1/ol/95 
l) Consolidated : Divisions (and le:Ct o·var 
Precincts) : 4-3, 4-'1, 10 hour schedule. The· City may, 11 00Ii:solidate," at its discretion, any 
remaining Precincts ns of Ol/01/95•. 
2) OtherUni~s,··_•(5-2)4 , (4-3)2, o hour scihadu;e~ 
~ 
.. 
(d) In corisideriitio~ :of· the aforegoing ·schei:iuies, ·t~e.·
) PBl\. shall. ·cooperate with the City · in its· consolidation·'· e:C:Cot'ts. Jlcciorclingly, · the: . PBl\. president ( or· his· ·designee) shall have ,.···standing invitation ::to:;_ all committee. _meetings where . 
·· consolid,ation,is "plannE!:d, discusse4_ or· implemented·.:· , The Department :agrees to send the PBh-.prasidenl: . notice of any such meetings in advance-. of th"eir () occurrence;_ · · : 
·" .:: . :.......-..· .
·::.:: :.\{'. .... ' 
.. : • 
.-.··:<·_;_~?<<.. 1'',,:..
... . . ., ...... 
. ' ~ .: ' 

.·:_:.--.['.~::i}i\i?f ,.:_.: 
..~, ,. ' 
.-.
:· :­
·,;:t;jf!~Ii/ 
,,, 
,·. -... 
., ,f.4::/·: ·:· :· · 


S) 
Gl!IFT TIHEr ' :·::•(:'. ~. 
. ·-· 
6.:45 am to 4:45· pm·:· 0645 1645' 4, oo pm to 2: oo·: am?:. lG00 0200 .,.ll:00 pm to 7:oo··•m·:· .·: • 2100 -0700 

. . . ,· . .-.: .. :;ii:t .: ...-· _',. ·;... 
·,.:···-.:The-: Commissioner shilll~'•hhvE! . ."fle)tibiiity iti'. scheduling ·o h6llr. 
· · st\Ht ,personnel assigned to,.h·eadquarters by scheduling. first shift·· 
. ,.·
·· employees;:to begin .no ea'rlier. than OGOO hours or later. than J;OOO .. 
· ..·· 
hours .consistent with curreilt;practice. · :,,:, ...... 
·,·.
·.-·: ·s. 
. G) BilIFT BIDDING: 
r/·:· -~~ ~--. :·.-~ ·_.­
.. :Unit-members within ench Precinct, Department,· Unit, •oivis{Cm:;,:_ Bureau,• or Section shall bid·•ori an available shift. In determining the plaCement of unit members -regarding shift preference,. seni:ority. •
0 
will. be determining £actor.·. . , .,'.. · . · · ....; 
. . ,·.. '. \. :.. 
d.) ,The ,comrnisSioner ·o'r" Polf~e, or his designee,· may-Set· al1°d' ••adjust 1nanpower ,levels annunlly on .all. shifts and within,: 
: all departmental. units...,. llotwithstanding the aforegoing;': · .·,-mnnpoper levels may!,be' 'adjusted more frequently due to·." · ··exigent circumstances .. ::·.. · 
',·
0 . (i") ·The current nrir·~-~~~nt/ between the .·ci"ty ana. the PBA ·\ ·.:regarding the· a~dgnment· of Probationary Officers sh'all; ·continue. • • • .,-:• :~ I • • • 7). DELETE ; . -c (BEPQnT;tlm··Til:\E) :' anc1 replace with the folJ..owing:·; '. . .. ,• '. ' ..•, . . . . :1 The value of the reportlrig time paid !or the 1992-93 contract, :year '(07/01/92 -05/J0/9J) shall be rolled into the ·schedule• 
• · ·. effective 07/0l/9J at a value of ten and one-half (10 1/2) · · 
•" .1 • '.
percent .. 
~--,-.~::.:.. 
·. a) . ·. nnrEFrtia PEnroo: 
·::/·· .Thia. fi~st 15 mi'~utas .. a'i:-.\uich shift time noted in' (5) ab6Ve·' 

·.shall. be designated as· _:brie.fing times.. Employees must :b'e ~­Present daily for briefing time unless otherwise ex~used ·.by,· their. commanding -officer. 
9) OVERTIME COHPEIISJ\TIOll: 
Whene.V~r any employee r~pres~ntl!d by the Union is regilired~·to· · 
·remain on duty or report. for duty in excess of a regular work·· ·-. . shift,• Such employees .shall be compensated at the rate or time'. . and one-half (1 1/2} for the time worked in excess of the .. regular worit shift . . ·.. · :.·: ~ 
O;l!t.i:.i~°e shall c~nsi~t.':of t\11 work per-Cormed in excess of• 
eight {Bl hours in any_ eight (0) hour toui;-of duty". or in 
•, e'xcesS o! ten (lo·) hours. in any ten (10) hour ·tour of duty or: in excess of foLty (40) ·,hours ·per week. Overtime. shall be< earned in-multiples of.. f.lfteen (15} minute periods. 
'·. 

.. ' 
... :· 
' , ' 

J.O) :-OVERTil!E PROCEDORE: 
1) . ·Article n, sectt~"i;"'. 2. 5-'· shall be atnended to .reflectt' • consolidated divisions. .... 

ti"ni:t :members• who:\~in:i:e ''sick and/or IOD time sha1l. n·o~':"-> be eligible to .work·, overtime (e,ccept when all other·:·. ·overtime proCedUres _'.?iilve been. exhausted) for a ,fOurteen ,: _.. 
· · (14 l day period from· ·their return from such leave·. Tha··: -1~ day period noted -above is a ·"rolling period" which is . calculated upon return tollpwing-use of sick and/or· roo:·, 'time. · ·· · 
l.ll . COURT .. TIIIE: 
0 l) Court Time shall .nOt'be pEl.id to any officer sUbpOehaed ·the Union in n proceeding for :h'e. 1Union 's interest.. 
,. 
:a) -.. Employees must appear :.i.n full uniform or wit~ a: spbr\: ,; ;: ·Coat, dress slacks or·-Suit and tie (or the E!quiviilent. f0r·._., .·: .· ·· female1 Police. Officers) for any appearance· in CO\l,rt. ·• '' 

. ;_ ..·· 
ouPanEmi:r-t,';:-.
C) .·::-;.·: .,t' 
l) ,· ·.:Revise Artidle ·r:i:' /'':section ·2. J.1 to renect change in•-:· : ··: shift times. 
" 
-. r. . . 
. • "13 )"., V~Cl\TIOllS: 
;,; '. 
. l)_ ·. 'Employ~·;s hired by-'the'ic!ty· before July i, 1984, ,and wh~:-i: · have been an employee of the City for at least one year~,­_.:..·shall be . granted . va.clil:ion in each calendar yenr:•;" corresponding to ·hfs/her years of· service pUrsuant to.'. :schedule /\ below:~.;:,,;--: , . .-/·;. 
,, 
. . ·.·:.-::~_; -: \:.,. . .:.::·;·. 
"ompiet',,'d . , . , 0 Hour-.Schedule' 1D Hour Schedule•'._\ ..,. ,_ s .of ser'V"ici:!::•:. ·. wee Jc~ Dnys :_ "tours . 'hours Tours .-· ~-··Jlours • 
' •••,. ~· i_
...."':' ..
) ':i-4 ... ;--. 
2 0 :,__.,,;<· ·10 80 a. . :--:·;· ·oo 
5 J 0 15 l.20 ·... 12.0'.•;:,: :i20
·-:_: ..'. 
'6 J l' lG l.2B lJ.D" ·•_: . l.JO 7 J 2 17 1J6 ·135· 
o.; 'J J 10· 14 4 -~~:;·_·;:(' 145 
9· J '19 ·J.52 ·-l.5. 0 · • 0 150 
,10 . 0• 20. J.60 1s.o:•,.. -160' .ll 1 u 160 17.O .170 12_ 2· 22 ,• J.76 17~5 175 lJ· J 2J 10~ 10. s' 105 l4 -• 24 192 19.0 , 190 15 and·oVer 5 D 25 200 :-:i.o.o-200 
,,• 
:In those situ;:,tlons: uhere an emplOyee is e'ntitled to less\. · than a full tour. in accordance. with the above ,schedule:_ ·such employee shall be entitled to take the said hours,as ,vacation time in half units. 
\ .. 
'' 
-:-· :·:. :· ', ~ 
:.;• .







tti\ti:~' 
.,. r •·
.... , . 
.•' ...:. ·:. :; ;:.,·· .'• :·,.. 
·-.1.·
: ·,· •,·
·••·;;:::t~~ 
::::; . 


... 
'•.: 

Employees hi'red ..by° the ·city on or after .July 1, 1984, .· shall be granted •vac.:1tion entitlements pursunrit to the roilowing Schedule: D: . ... ... 
Completed D l!o~i.\-::heclule -10 !lour sciheclule ars of·Seryl.ce Weeks Tours Hours 
.·Touts Hmll::.! 
··1..: ·•·. l ::Js:·· 
41
3'..:· G.. :.1•:· :~
,2 10 
.., Bl . .1-· .9 .... ·'· J 15: .'120 '· 121
10~1s-· •· .·,:,. 
4 · ·20 160 .:161 16 and .. over1 5 .. 2s·· ,'•' 200 _201 
.· \ ~houlel an ernploy~e· nOt· co·mplete a full twelve (l.2) iaonth
o. 
·. ·-·ye·ar, the .empl°tSy"ee sha.11 be entitled ton !).t"o rnta. shB.re · .· ot his/her vacation.entitlement pursuant to Schedule A or ·· B ·a}?ove, computed ..by taking the. total nu1t\ber of months . ,~ _;woriced over ·a twe·1ve ·.month period,. dividing _by twf!lVe ·.:. ·(l:?) . and multiplying it times his/her ,.vncation 
· :· .. :._. · entit,lement, as rou·11ded to the nearest half~ 
.. ·s/:-,.:. 'nevise Section /t(Crirryovers) . 
. . The Commissione~ ::~hall. allow vacatioli cnrryover in the 
specific instances which fol!ow! ~ 
i a) The Comm.i.Ssi~M~r\ requesting · ot' req\liri11g ~.a:n employee to £orego scheduled vacation in.order that 
said department may provide and maintain adequate service to.the_ public. 
b) J\n timployee·. beint;J' injur-ecl in the discharge.of his· .• du tie~~ ·-:·:.:•·\::t: 
... 
, 
6) Revise Section .! ,6. (W~~kly -Vacation [WV]) .Days 
4·.. 6 Use o(Sinaie ·,mnUnl Vacati?.n ..(_J\-V) pnys. EmplO:,i-efls
) may use at his/her option.up to e.iijf,€ (!@ single 1\-V.days . ·for ten (l·0) hour'1!mployees [ten (l0) sin51le 11..:v.days.for i},-,~ 
. ei9ht. ·(O) hout;·;employeesJ, one at a t-1;me;-' du~~g:~eL..,.....-< p montl"!s of June, .July and August,/\ These .a-a:-grrt_·($1.1,[o'r1ten • · 
,· ."(l0)J individual•:days _may be taken in addition to,nny " 
,,.,. 
· : other schedult!d sum.met vaca tlon, provided t.hey; are·. not · taken in conseCutlve .unlts. The current procBdure. as '. ) ·applied to the appllcition and granting of such slngle 1\-V days shall. cont!nue. ., · 
7) Revise the_vacatlon entitlement chart to correspond with 21 ten (10) ·hou,r. worlt -schedule. 
_..... 
.......... 
.­

.·..­
·. -· .-·­
_j 

' .. . ·... ::,,.·· .:./:'
.· ..­

H) BICK ll.ND Ill.TURY ., 
l) 
. ·. o·elete the following -provisions from the·· e,cpired · · · contract: 

(H) 
l) In instances of disability due to illness ·which lasts three·. p) shi.fts or less, an employee ma.y··


o: return to duty without ·.the written certi.Cication o.C a physician, provided notification is given by the employee.'. to 'his Captain. :-.-·.'·. : . . , . . · . , , 
.•. 
2) In i'nstances of disability due to illness' , Which lasts more than three (J) shifts, an employee must, obtain the written, cei::tification of a physician, and/or 
·the Department surgeon before that employee may return to • •·!duty. 
• J) ·In· instances of disability due to an off­'d.uty injury or nccident, the employee must obtain written 
···certificntion · of a physicinn and/or the Department· surget;m before that employee may return to duty. Tl).is; requirement may.be waived by the Commissioner cf Police·· 
() o.f his designee. · ·l 
(I) It shall_oe the responsibility·o.C the_employ~e­to maintain and·· monitor an ,accurate account of his current sick leave entitl8ments•. Employees who-request: and receive sick ieavei in excess of their entitlements 
-:shall have an equal number of hours · deducted :l:n ·a· · ·subsequent pay period. 
... (J) /\ll .abSen·ces. due to illness o.re to be 'reJ;)o;:-1:ed_·· tO the commissioner of Police or his designee on Or before the first day ,of such absence, and the Commissioner: may requl:re reasonable proofs of .illness. 
. '.,. In the event o.f 1 a . failure to comply with the." .notice· .requirements ln·this Article, the employee's absence mn~. _. be conside"t·ed as unauthorized-leave .. Abuse of sick leave) ·p·rrvileges may be·_cause _for disciplin~ry action.· 
nepJace the· above· delet~d proviSion with i:he foii~w!'ng:._ t=!r6visions: ... · 
'. Employees . \,dll-4>-b~ ·.: eli9lble tor sick leave, only when· ;--.suffering from an. il.lness or off:-duty injury that would •. prevent the pet"formance of their duties. Employees who misuse o'r abuse sick leave privilegl!s may be subject to 
.disciplinary actio'n. -• . , • . 
. All absences due to illness or injury nre to be rePorted 
•to the CornmissiOner or his designee on or b_efcsre the first day of such. absence, and. the Comm.i.ssioner may r~quire reasonable proofs of! illness (or injury). In ,the · event of a failure ·to comply with the notice·1requirements · 
in this l\.rticle, tlle:employee's absence may be considered · ns· unauthorized leave.. l\buse of siclc lenve privileges· ' may· be cause f0t' disciplinary .action. · 
I.'• 
,... 
,, 
' ., 

. 'J) Ob)lgation of Emp:lovee on· Sigk g;r IOD Leavg to Remain ··at .. ·Home or in -Plnee of Confinement -Shift OnlY. 
. . 
(fl) Unless authOrized :by· the Commissioner· or his:· designB.ted . re}?resentat1ve, a · melnber of the. Department On sick or IOD leave will not leave his' residence _or pl'ace of oon.finement except for: 

0 
0 
...l.5) 
. l.6) 
• ! 
) 
l.7)' 
:; 
~ 

(l) ob t.a inin9'_. Professional meclical treatment;
-~-. ..
. 
(2) per:Corming·· exercise prescribed in wr'iting b~t , his physician .which is part of his recovery:, treatment, a copy of which· must be submitted··· to the commissioner or his, designee., . prior to · 
commencing-such exercise. 
· (B) Permission to'··1e~ve the residen~e for reasons other than cited above· ·.must be documented by the . Cc7mmanding ,Officer,· Duty Officer, or IAD. 
(C) For employees on an unchallenged IOD leave, the: 
~commissioner may grant a waiver of con£inement for­all or part of _such _leave. The Commissioner1 s determination shall be made on a case-by-case 
·l:Jasis.. 1 
l!OTICE 
Employees who anticipate_ being absent from worlc due to injury 
. or ·illness must tnalce every reasonB.ble effort to giv~ notice to.. their commanding officer, aS 'far in advance as pOssible priOr· .to the start or their shift time . 
COURT TIME Wl[ILll OH SICJC Llll\VE on IOD 
· OffiCerS ·whot while on s·iok or IOD leave st.atus, are rE!qui~ed by tl)e city, the· District r.ttorney"s Office, any court or administratlve agency to appear for any reason which _relates to an --incident, action or event involving the officer acting within the performance of his duties as a Duffalo Police Officer (not while employed by another employer) , must, appear• · · (i:C medically able). · Such officer shall be considered as 
·working on such day(s), entitl.ing the officer to court ti1ne. If . the officer is medically unable to appear, reasonable­advEinoe. ·notice of· such .fact must be given to the authority ·requiring his/her presence. 
?llRFECT .'ilTTENDJ\NCE Il{CENTIVE 
Officers .:who have hnd}t;>erire·ct ottendance for each two {2)° month period (J>eginning with July l-~ of each contract year) {i.e.·,. have not talcen any sick or IOD time) shall receive, on or before June 30 of each-fiscal year, eight (B) hours" credit· for.. each such two (2) · m6nth period. The of.ficer may--:-_either ,·take the ·credits in co.sh, ·or, at his/her optibn1 may bank the' en"b.ixe.· credit emount. -o.c".clcers who elect cash shall, be paid• ··at,· the then contractual stra.ight-time rate. Officers who_ el.eat to have such credits banked may cash them in at the time. of: .retirement, res~gnation or _death at the then _straight-time·. 


ra:te. 
. .. ,,. ::.. 
.··.•· 
.. ·, 


: ::;~;:, I ,,f~/
... 
lO) l\llTICLll O ILEl\VB Ol" li,DElilliCE WITDOUT Pl\Y) 
Change title of, Section. u·.:3 _to· read· "ll!1ternity/Patern:i.ty Leave." (This le,ive shall also inclucle adoption of a child · under 2 years of· age.) .... 

19). BENIO!tITY 
. ... ,·•· 
•.·•· 
By. side letter exempting a ·captain in Administration and·'.
.... 
Ccinununiaations ' ;from the application or 1:,h'l: seniority_· . prov;isions •. 
20) ·BllTTLEHi'lllT OF DIBPUTEg •·. 
Inc.orporate currerit Ml?morandum of Agreement reached by the: 
. parties on February 21·, 1992 into the contract.·
' ., 
2l.) PDl\. ·:nllLEl\BE Til!B 
·· :1ncorJ;)Orate PD1\ ReleaSe Ti~e i\greainent duted oe:cembe:r :31, 199i. into the contract. 
' 
:. 22 )· DEiUllL
'.) •. . The city shall provid°.i"the GHI Spectrum Plus Dental Program·to· unit Dletnbers.-The City reserves th.e. right to change·carriers,­or ·to self inst.Ire at anytime~ with the PB1\.' s consent, -so-long'. as th~. benefits by the new carrier or by self insurance-are· • overn.ll, equal to or •··better than those.: provided by the=. existing· carrier.• neo.s'6nable advance notice shall be provided to the PDl\ Pres id'ent: in advance of any such change. The PBl\' sha.11· not unreasonably 'lotithhold its consent to such proposed ctiange. 
·Iff...hhe event any dispute ari'Se betWeen the par'ties conce:rnin9"·. 
the. above, either party may submit the dispute to expeditecl" 
arbitration. 
) 
23) l'LEXrDLE !!PEllDIIIG l\CCOOl!T 
Thi:! City and the POI\ may negotiate the tenns of a flexible::. spending.-account plan. The purpose of the plan shall be to··.. prov-ide Unit members which more benefit selections and'pre-tax 
dollar opportunities \/hile ·at. the same time helping the city·,.. . to contain its bene!f'"t,·costs .. ·· 11.dministro.tive fees associated· . with the plan shall be, paid by the City.. Monies ma)' be used,:· 

on a Pre-tax basisf for'health benefits, dental benefits, 1ife insurance and dependent Care expense~ to the extent allowed by law... ­
'. 
-'7'"''-:' ,. ••· .
., .,,. 
•, .. 

. ·.'.·. 

.,·., 
:i·:. 
.,.
.•....· 
.·, .· :, ·••· 
., :.\.. . ,:· ·.•.. ·· . ., 
v: " 

/;I ••• 
. '• ' 2 .) ,·ONE/TWO OP!'ICEn PJ\TnDLa·:,_
',,'• _.., .. 
...... "ay ~id~-:i;;-tt~;:. "re-stati,.'.'the parties' llgreement to comply with the •Prosper Interest.. hrbitration Award concerning one/two officer patrols with the following provision: . 
.() Each party to this llg_r,eement Pledges its best eff.ort towards: ·moving to a one/two officer patrol system. ,.
() . . 2s> · BV1\tol\Tlon oP um:T HEniizria .. 
: .._;­
Th,." p~rties shall nego.tfate terms and conditions ··associat~d.:· with the evaluation· of,.PDl\ unit members. Either party ·may:, . ·submit.unresolved issues·to interest arbitration not earlier!'. 
than-J months following ratification of the 1992-95 l\greement. (. 
2 6) ': .C,:VILil\NIZl\TIOll 
The:Pal\. agrees that the·oepar.tment may civilianize (Partial1Y: ":·,: ,.._or.-cofflpletely),, at _the City's option, the following areas:._,.:;.:· 
"· • . · l j .:-:i Desk duties 'in the· Precincts or Districts. .' :.:/:
2) ··... Cell Block attendallts ~ ·. · ·; ..•· ~) ·· ·;•oispatching (by, attrition) . ;·;'(:} 
·_No·-uni~· employee slialf'.b~--·iaid ~ff _as a result of the, Cityi;i(. 
:·-,..27.\. _:;:_r;-i:::~::&e::::::~~oted above. 
. ::.-~i 
·· .Th'e.: parties agx:--ee to .enter into negotiations for a drug. B.ii'dt"; ·:...-olcbhol testing progiam:as soon as possible after the signing\· 
. ·.:. : .... ,of-:this l\greement"..· This··clause shall· not be interpreted as-:a'._:. :,'· '.,'·:.,:: ·..·wa'Iver.. of whatever legill r,i.ghts the parties may possess. _:in•;. ·': .: ··:i·1~··this· area. ,: : . · 1: •.••~i
..... 
... ,..,; ., ·.. /\--.-.1:1 ,:,,;,.~­
..... ,, ' .~ ...: •': ·:·:./•,;,. . . ----. ,... 
20)'":,.Ep1lC1ITIO!! STIPEND . ,_;,i,;; · . ._'·;,:\ 

·'. .. ·,, :/\~{/~~ followi~g:. ·.
1: '-:\11vJ }J,&'11 Af)Ii_ . i} 
··•:·~--·"(/\'J-"..-WEffeCtive .:rul.y 1, :,tm, eligible emplOyees shall•recelV~;;, ·. -~ ::: ,:.• ::=.~· · the following stipend: ... ··.,,:.:.•.:,.·.~-. 
, • • I .,,::i.,~ , • • ·• ,-:, ~'.;·· 1·.1r Employees pOSsess.i.ng an ass-ociate•s degree or· so·, .. 
• ·:·_': ;_:.', :-. college credits shall receive !;JS0.00 in addition·;· _;:;>:·-: to regular_:~-~ary and longevity amounts. ·. ·_.~~;f 
1 
'-:-· :.-_! :2)· EmploYees po·sses.Sing n J?ochelor of arts or"'. ;if_. bach'i!lor·• ot •science degree or 120 college· c:tedits;­shall rec~iVe. a .$700.00 stipend in addition ..to:·• regular salor}', ond longevity amoun~s-~· •.:.~!­
.' . 
Employees po"ssess~ng a ma~·ter of a·rts or. a mast~/ ~ of science degree or a higher degree shall receive ·a $900.00 stipend in addition to ~egulnr salary and~ 
longevity amounts. 
1•. 
•' .. 
···•.. 
j 
' 
i 
'· I 

. •.,. 

I •i •· 
'••::•• 
__ 2{) ONE/T><O OFFICER PATROLS 
By side letter re-state the parti~s• Agreement to comply with the Prosper Interest Arbitration Award concerning one/two officer patrols with the following provision: · 

Each party to this Agreement pledges its best effort towards 
moving to a one/two officer patrol system. 
25) EVALUATION OF UNl:T MEMBERS 
The parties shall negotiate terms and conditions associated
C) 
with the evaluation of PBA unit members. Either party may submit unresolved issues to interest arbitration not earlier than 3 months following ratification of the 1992-95 Agreement. 
26) CIVILIJ\NIZATION 
The PBA agrees that the Department may civilianize (partially 
or completely),.at the City's option, the following areas: 
l) 
Desk duties in the P~ecincts or Districts. 

2) 
Cell Block attendants 

3) 
Dispatching (by attrition). 


I() 
No unit employee shall be laid off as a result of the City•s civilianization efforts noted above. 
27) DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING 
The.parties agree to enter into negotiations for a drug and·
) 
alcohol testing program as soon as possible after the signing of this Agreement. This clause shall not be interpreted as a waiver of whatever legal rtghts the parties may possess in this area. · 
28) EDUCATION STIPEND 
Add the following: /OD~ ,fj;?fJ.; ffJlt 
77'.J . 
(A) 
Effective July 1, ~. eligible employees shall' receive the following stipend: 

l) 
Employees possessing an associate' s degree or 60 college credits shall receive SJS0.00 in addition to regular salary and longevity amounts. 

2) 
Employees possessing a bachelor of arts or a bachelor of science degree or 120 college credits shall receive a S700-00 stipend in addition to regular salary and longevity amounts. 


Employees possessing a master of arts or a master of science degree or a higher degree shall receive a $900.00 stipend in addition to regular salary and longevity amounts. 
eec.:s 1$B SHL! 

(Bl General rules pertaining to degree or stipend payment: 
1) All credits and degrees must have been obtained and earned at a college accredited by the New York State Department of Education. 
2) For employees seeking the foregoing stipend as a result of credits earned, courses must have been 
passed with a grade of "C" or better, or, for pass/fail courses, a passing grade. 
3) Employees requesting the foregoing stipend must present the Commissioner or his designee with an official transcript, together with a completed fonn as agreed upon by the city and PBA. 
4) Employees shall only be eligible for one payment in any category described above. Furthermore, paYlllents pursuant to these categories shall not be cumulative. Thus, an employee having two bachelor's degrees and an associate•s degree shall be eligible for only one ~tipend of,,$7:P,,D.OO. 
~-.:r,,/y / ~1\i??r~ r<r/-1..
C) 
{C) Payment: Eligible{'employees sball receive a lump sum payment on or~of each year in a fUll or pro rata amount, whichever is applicable, provided they are on the payroll on this payment date. 
(D) In the event an associate degree is required for entry
) level employment (for future recruits), said recruits shall not be eligible for associate degree stipend. 
29) DETAILING 
(A) The parties agree that the Department shall have the right to detail officers .of any rank on the basis of seniority. Detailing may be used by the Department to cover for short term absences such as personal leave, vacation time, sickness, blood days, etc. It shall be the intent of the Department to detail on a shift by shift basis and within the officer•s division.(;·. ,,,_ ., ' 
., ! .,.. ' 
(B) Based on the aforegoing, the PBA withdraws all detailing grievances together with any related demand(s} for arbitration. 
30) HEALTH/HOSPITALIZATION 
See Attached 

aszs ,se s1L: 
·•. 
llEllLTll l\llD."i)&l!TllL CllllE COVEnAGE 21.:1. llenlth Insurnnce " 
. . ...... /·:?.;:;::: .. . . . 
The City shall provide, at•:its exp<1nse, health and medical coverage .. for all; employees under the•,Blue cross Hospital, Hedical/Surgic!'ll•" 

... 
. r•. 
C) ::?> 
) 
Traditi'onal 90-91 Plan with·, the following riders: ., :,,..i:· .;;.'•, ., . . ._.;,),:~:·: . :·.' . ' . .:.'{~:.. . :.~-:-:· 
(l\)" .: Unlimited. Major HedicaFExpense Rider (DOn-1-7), without~,..•.),. . : '.': _prescription drug ,benefit, Yith a ·$100/$200 deductible,',;\., .'<i,~ ·; ·,.cThe. City · may ·self-fund above the $100/$200 to,, ··a:,,: '',:i!,!L · ·· $50·0;$1, ODO deductible. using a third party admi'nistrator·;}',' ';-i'!:i·? .•. · ... !·.::'.. • ....:·.-:~:':·:. · ... · · • • • · :\:liiJ J}\'.: ',(B}:. Rider O (Dependents·.• to l\ge 23) .,_,,.~r ···'·. 
. . . , ,::\:~/: ...,:. . ' ~;J. ,,}(} 
, ... _' ·(c(,,-:nider 4 (Emergency.outpatient ElCG) •:.. •,-~:;.' '';;"',·: . ·\•._·.. : J,.-.:~ .·/:\ . . : .. ?:'.; ..;i.'~(\/, .:(_ (\i,: ,.,e.··. ;,(D) ;··cRider-14 (Psychiatric Rider) ·,,;,ff[i ·.-,.'1.">.-. : ... •.. J.ii.. . . '' ·{:}/::Jr_ :f:.t:· ·.:·.:,, (E} :·\•:IncrJ!ase the curient prescription dru~ rider to a $5'. 06{ -'.\ ·. ,".'· :,(generic)/$10.00 (brand name) co-pay. . . •...., 
..; : \/: ?J:",. . \. . . {' ·.\:. 
·In. thf!'·_eV~l1t. thE! cl.ty elect$_ to self fund as describiad above, :if} shall .provide reasonable advance notice to the, PBJ\ Pre.sident.;in·~: -:,'..·. advance:,of such change. 'l'he· PB/\ shall not unreasonably with.hold) 
·. consenti·,·to :-such proposed charige. _ In the event any dispute arise{-~t· · · between,:_the parties concerning such self funding, either party may:!~ . ·1•_:·. ".'submit,.the dispute to expedited arbitrnl.ion. . · · , .,;;: 
•'.:. '•l', .. . .'1{,-::~., · ' . , ~...-.-,._._~;".-. ·: :',. ~-!X In:thia. eviant the city self-'f\lnds above the $1.0d/$200 level' then no:,,. 
I
participant s expenses sheill: exceed the $100/$200 level. : :.,r 
·i 2·~·: 2·\'.H~--~~~~i ,Insurance up·o·~-:~c til:-ement ·,_:·~:'.:~) 
1 
EmPl'oy-·~~~,:·who retire_ durin·~~\:he life cf this J\greeme~ or until, 
~f 
. successor J\greement is execut.ed by the. Mayor or imposed by interest~ arl;l'itration with :zo or more .. years of serv.i,ce Yith the. Buffalof Po1ice Department, or vho take a disability retirement resulting;• from· an·,·injury sustained in ,the line of duty shall be entitled to/ receive:':'paid health/hospital'izatlon (less mnjor medical covernf;e)'{: 
:with a. $5.oo (generic)/Sl0.00. (brand name) drug rider. This shall'(!· be.a. lifetime benefit for those retirees who retire during the term·~ '·'/::· of', this ·J\greement. · ·~-:: 
21·: J ~ o~hrt~1. Insuprnco -~·~:~; 
See Pa~~g_r·~ph 22 to 'main packet c.i.Ptloned "Oeri.tnl". 
21,: .: liotiticntion or oi:at"u? 
c~t'reni: ·'(1906.:..ooj contract: languuge. 
·> • lt-,h Briever· a $5. 00/$10. oo: co-pa:; is li.Steu ih this 1\rt.icl~, the': 
.city··.mny, ot its option,. substitute a $9.00 drug co-pay pendii:,g approval, of:· Blue Cross's application for a $5.00/$10.00 co-pay__ ·provis"iol1• said. $9..• 00 co-p'ay ,.shall include contraceptives. 


_·.;. 

'.) 
(D) 
General rules pertaining to degree or stipend payment: 

l) 
All credits· and degrees ·must have been obtained and ·· earned at n college accredited by the New Yorlc: · State Department of Education. 

2) 
!'or employees seelcing the foregoing stipend as a 


() result of. cre"dits •. earned, courses must have ··been 11 c 11
•passed with a•, grade of or better, or, for:· . 
· pass/fail courses,: a passing grade. 
J) Employees re.~esting the foregoing stipend must· ·. present the· Coinmissioner or his designee with an.·'. official transcript, together with a completed form as agreed upon.by the City and FDA.· 

Employees shall only be eligible r'or one payment in 
any category d.e.scribecr above. Furthermore, 
pa'yments pursuant to these categories shall: not oe 
cumulative. Thus,. an employee having . two· baohelor•s degrees arid an nssociate 1 s degree shall 
be eligible for Only one ~tipend ofA7+1p.oo. 
C) _,,-_a/3-,,.11,{. .:/"tily I ~1-f]'f, (<r/"'-. (cJ Payment: Eligibl'o/ employees shall receive a lump sum·:> 
_payment on or~-1>ne-:rot:h-of each year in a· full or ., . pro rata amount,, whichever-ie applicable, provided they · ·· are on the payroll.on· this payment date. · · 
(DJ ::tn: the event en aSS~O.iatEI. degree ·is req\lired :Cor enti:y:, level employment (for future recruits), said recruits·:'(-. .. shall not be eligible for.associate degree •stipend. ?: 
2 9) . DET,l\ILillG 
·.,'.; (A) The parties agree: that the Department shall have. the . 
. . r 
0 "right to detail· officers of .any rank .on the basis of• seniority. Detailing may be used by the Department to ·:· · paver .for short term absences such Q.S personal. leave, f;;
) 
,vacation time, s1cltness, ·,blood days, etc. It· shall be"··_. the intent of the· Department to detail on a shift by.:-.. shift· basis and within the officer's division.· · ..,.:· 
(B) Bns~d on the aforeg'oi~g:.-th~ FBI\ withdraws all d~tailing};I 
._c_'·. grievances together.· with any related clemand(s) for:'>,'; . .. arbitration. ·. .·.· 
3 0) ::m:nLT!tiliosP:rTl\LIZl\TIOl{ 
' 
··· See Attached 

." 
'•
·: ' 
.::--·•· 
:•:.-. 
. .' 
.. 
21.s ·--Dttn· on DYDlicnte Enrollment 
. ,(/\) 
: Bali. fot' Active c:mplgyges · 
'. 1, 
(l) ·. No employee sliail .be entitled to health or. dental: · · ·i · 1• insurance cover!rge--~at City expense if tl1e 'employee ..is~.·. •''(). -.eligible for coveriige under another comparable health•;.;. 
() ' .insurance or dental plan. This ban on duplicate health·•·.' ..or dental coverage also npplies wliere both spouses and/or: ,. '·family members are_-elnploy11:es of the ·city. ·· ..•. 
·.• I 
· (2) Employees subject' to· the no duplication ban noted in (/\) · .' ...-above shall be entitled to the r.ollowing vaiver in lieu.•,.> :· of coverage: 
' ~-1
() (.) $1,000 for waiver · of the. health insurance plan •.i'f .. ( family coverage) (or $500 for waiver o.C single.:'ri1'. coverage) following a :Cul.l year of waived heo.lth'.-'·.-~­i'nsurance. Pro rata amounts shall· be paid for each\:;:· full month of. health insurance waived-,. 
' . . 
(b) ./In employee who .is entitled to _dental coverage may·_-·'./ elect to · waive such coverage. J\.11 · employees;'>,'· waiving cOverage will receive the sum o:r $12. so per·;·•.·,i; month' (up to $150. 00 per year). · ,.,
\ :: 
"•(c) The city '1ill' not provide dental coverage for any_:·.'.:. . employee \.lhose spouse has comparable or superior-•:;; coverage as .. the result of employment . in City(··1~· :-:~.:· se~lce. Said em[)l"oyee shall receive the. sum of ~:~t Sl0.00 per month (up to $120.00 per year). ·,.:·
0 
I .• • 
i•/•.'', • ••~,: .....·· ( B) :.· Dan on. pup} icate 'Eht:ollmt!nt -Retirees: The city shall-~·~,~ ' .•\not be obligated_._,to provide any medical or hospita1·;;~ 

: ) ' 
._:insut:ance coverage~. rego.rdless of the t:ype of plan, for·1 ,~: ,.. any retiree who is: eligible for coverage under another:.·;.'. · comparable health· _insurance plan. Retirees hereunder:.·'-. ·-.-:·· ·. :-shall be entitled· to on annual waiver fee of $720.00 or:":-: · .' .:: ·:.•,.-:·a. -pro rata sum, ot.. i/l2th for each full :month wllived...{;\ ::.--.: ..;:_,.}~:,Pa.yment shall be made on or before June JO of each year.·/~: 
. •. ~' .·.: '•'.;.':i : • • . • • •• . ;,•;·, 
·rci"~;:~.f~ll· Year Defined:: .·~-ro·r purposes o{ this Article, a· full:~·-·, _ ~~::.year -shall be cleflni!d as .July l of one year to June :,o of.;~\; : _;~=-·the next. · ·· · 
. ! :,--. .,_._... 
(D) ··;:~·°Jia.·YJilfints: PDyme'ntS for· wn ived insurance under tn.iS ~ · · ~--Article shall be made on or bef'ore June JO of' each ye.a.r•. -:· 
(E;~·:::·ne.:.eatry rota tbe Cl'"t:~•s· Plan; s1:~uicl the emplo:Y'"ee's or~_:'. 
retiree•s alternate health or dental coverag! be·. terminated. for any rea'son, such employee vill be en1:i:tled _-_·~ ·_to covera9e unde~..th e _City I s heq,_l th a,ncl/,6r. rll?nt_a.l pl':'n /·-: . herein, . prov-ided· the." employee notifies the. City, in. _ 
wrlting 6 imrnediate?ly following ·the loss of alternate,-;_._ . . cove.rage, and provides proof thereof. . Coverage shall be 
/~·•reinstated as ,soon as posslble, but in no event ;ater . . .··:,·than the flrst day. of the month following· the. City's-_ : .. ~· recefpt of the nbov~ notification. 

.. 
.. -,,-.. .. 
' 
hltarnnta rroalth rnsuranco Covorago
CJ 
Current (1906-00) contract ;}~~uage. 
. . ·,
..,,,,._ 

0 
•.. 
0 
) 

) 
., 
., 
·.,•...) 

() IT_.:ts AG!UlED BY AND BETWEiliU.'llE PlUlTIES Tlll\T Af'IY. l?ROVISI0!-1 OJ!' 
.,.. 
THIS· AGREEMllNT REQUIRING LEGISLATIVE ACTION TO l?ERMIT ITS •,. 
Il-lPLEMllNTATION .llY 1\MllNDMllNT OF,..LIIW OR llY PROVIDING 'l'UE ADDITIONAL 
~,mos ,TE!llRllFORll, SIUILL NOT BECOME EF.FllCTIVll UNTIL TllE 1\J?PROPIUATll 
!GISLl\'.CIVJ;: BODY !ll\S GIVEN APPROVJ\l,. 

IN WITNESS WllllnllOl!', ~he·pa:r:eies have set .thei:r: hands this day of ,llpril, l993·. . •,;;,
. 
',\\,_.. 
FOR THE BUE'l!'J\LO PBA FOR TUil CITY OF !3UE'l!'l\LO 
() 

C) 

'}].·:.xt 
>··:._ 

·' 
·' 
) 
) 
... 
--·· 

12­
) 

, ....·.. ,
'• ..
~i~· . 
..·. ,, -· 
,. :. '
-~::\ ...._. .:/:: 
" .
.. . . 
'· 

() 
0 


VII. 
1990 -1992 
0 
.,) 
Prosper Award 
J 
iU 
l 
j 
_j 
STATE OF NEW YORK PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS BOARD 

In The Matter of The Interest Arbitration Between BUFFALO POLICE BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION, INC. 
AND THE CITY OF BUFFALO, NEW YORK PERS Case No. IA91-010; M91~041 
The Public Arbitration Panel members are: 
C) 
FINAL AND BINDING 
OPINION AND AWARD OF TRIPARTITE ARBITRATION PANEL 
PUBLIC PANEL MEMBER AND CHAIRMAN: 
PUBLIC EMPLOYEE PANEL MEMBER 
) 
·PUBLIC--EMP.L.OYER PANEL MEMBER: 
APPEARANCES: 
Peter A. Prosper 
Union College __,.. Department of Economics Schenectady, New York 12308 
Robert P. Meegan, Jr., President Buffalo Police Benevolent Association 74 Franklin Street Buffalo, NY 14202 
Joseph L. Randazzo, Esq. Flaherty, Cohen, Grande, Randazzo and Doren. 135 Delaware Avenue Buffalo, NY 14202 
For the Police Benevolent Association 
W. James Schwan, Esq. Wyssling, Schwan and Montgomery 1230 Delaware Avenue Buffalo, NY 14209 
...... 
Richard H. Wyssling, Esq. Wyssling, Schwan and Montgomery 1230 Delaware Avenue Buffalo, NY 14209 
For the City of Buffalo 
Dennis J. Campagna, Esq. Flaherty, Cohen, Grande, Randazzo and Doren 135 Delaware Avenue Buffalo, NY 14202 


() 
' () 
0 i 
.) 
2 
Pursuant to the provisions of Civil Service Law, Section 209.4, P-auline R. , Kinsella, Chairperson of the New York State Public Employment Relations 
-·· •"". ... · . 
Board, designated the undersigned on August 21, 1991, as the Public Arbitra­tion Panel for the purpose of making a just and reasonable determination on the matters in dispute between the City of Buffalo ("City") and the Buffalo Police Benevolent Association, Inc. ("PBA" or •·•Association"). 
The City of Buffalo is located in Erie County, on the shore of Lake Erie. It has a population of approximately 324,000, the second largest city in the state of New York. It is also the county seat and the major metropolitan area within the county. The Buffalo Police Benevolent Association, Inc. represents a bargaining unit consisting of all sworn police officers employed by the City police department except the Commissioner and the three deputy commission­ers. Total number of sworn police officers in the bargaining unit is approxi­mately 998. Of this number, 754 are police officers, 67 detectives, 16 assistant dispatchers, 3 police photographers, 20 detective sergeants, 104 police 
. 
... 
lieutenants, 23 police captains, 6 police inspectors, 5 directors_or chiefs (police training, administrative· services, homicide, detectives), and one polygraph examiner. 
The prior Collective Bargaining Agreement between the parties covered the period from July 1, 1986, until June 30, 1988. Negotiations in 1988 for a 
successor agreement were unsuccessful, and impasse was declared. After 
() 
3 

mediative efforts failed, the PBA filed a petition for compulsory interest arbitration. An arbitration panel was designated, with John Sands, Esq., as chairman. The arbitratio"n ·panel issued· its award on September 5, 1989, covering the period from July 1, 1988 through June 30, 1990. 
0 
The parties began negotiations anew for a successor agreement in early 1990, with a combined total of fifty-nine Proposals submitted by both parties. 0 On April 10, 1991, the PBA filed a declaration of impasse with the State of New York Public Employment Relations Board. A mediator's efforts were unsuc­cessful, and the PBA filed a petition for compulsory interest arbitration. The Chairperson of the Public Employment Relations Board designated the above­named arbitration panel to resolve the dispute. Hearings were held in Buffalo, New York on Wednesday, November 20, 1991, Thursday, November 21, 1991, Friday, November 22,_ 1991, and Saturday, November 23, 1991, at which time 
-~.. ·--·-··· 
both parties were provided opportunity to introduce evidence, present testimony, summon witnesses, cross-examine witnesses, and otherwise support their respective positions on the outstanding issues. The parties filed post­
.,.. 
hearing briefs and reply briefs. At the hearing the parties agreed to submit approximately eight issues 
each for evaluation and decision by the arbitration panel. Those issues are: 
Shifts; Vacations; Sick Leave {Confinement); Sick Leave Incentive; Sick Leave 
Abuse; Discipline and Discharge; Overtime; Seniority; Uniform Allowance; 
() 
0 
() 
(_) 
I 

. ) 
) 
4 
.,.Man Patrols; Health Insurance Coverage; Maintenance of Benefits Article; 
Dental Insurance; Reporting Time; Longevity; Educational Incentive\ 
· All issues and their attendant support submitted· by each party were 
..• 
carefully considered, as well as the responses by the opposing party. 
The Public Arbitration Panel met in executive session on_ April 30, 1992, and deliberated on each of the outstanding issues, carefully and fully consid­ering all the data, exhibits and testimony received from both parties. The results of those deliberations are contained in the AWARD, which constitutes the Panel's best judgment as to a just and reasonable solution of the impasse. Those issues presented by the parties which are not specifically dea)t with in detail in this AWARD were also ·carefully considered by the Public Arbitration Panel, but rejected in their entirety. For each issue, the discussion below pres­
ents the positions of the parties and the Panel's analysis and conclusion. 
In arriving at the determination contained herein, the Public Arbitration Panel has considered the following statutory guidelines with which it was charged by Section 209.4: 
.. 
(v) the public arbitration panel shall make a just and reasonable determination of the matters in dispute. In arriving at such 
· determination, the panel shall specify the basis for its find­ings, taking into consideration, in addition to any other relevant factors, the following: 
a. comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of employment of the employees involved in the arbitration proceeding with the wages, hours, and conditions of employment of other employees performing similar services or requiring similar skills under similar working conditions 
5 
and with other employees generally in public and private employment in comparable communities. 
b. 
the interests and welfare of the public and the financial ability of the public employer to pay; 

c. 
comparison of peculiarities in regard to other trades or professions, including specifically, (1) hazards of employ­ment; (2) physical qualifications; (3) educational qualifica­tions; (4) mental_ qualifications; (5) job training and skills; 

d. 
the terms of collective agreements negotiated betwe~n the parties in the past providing for compensation and fringe benefits, including, but not limited to, the provisions for salary, insurance and retirement benefits, medical and hospitalization benefits, paid time off and job security. 


(vi} the determination of the public arbitration panel shall be final and binding upon the parties for the period prescribed by the panel, but in no event shall such period exceed two years from the termination date of any previous collective bargaining agreement or· if there is no previous collective bargaining agreement then for a period not to exceed two years from the date of determination by the pan'el. Such determination shall not be subj~_ct..t.o the approval C!f any local legislative body or other municipal authority. 

. ~-.... ~ --· . 
TERM OF AWARD 
·· Both parties are in agreement that because of .;~e date of this Award and 
pursuant to the provisions of Civil Service Law Section 209.4(vi), the Public 
Arbitration Panel is limited to a maximum of a two-year Award, the term of this 
Award shall be from July 1, 1990 through June 30, 1992. 
6 
SALARY 

Average annual salaries, exclusive of longevity but including step increment, 
of police officers for the City of Buffalo currently in effect are: 
Police Officers $29,755 Ranks Above Police Officers $34,958 Average For Unit $31,033. 
When longevity payment are included, the average annual base pay, 
including longevity is: 
Police Officers $30,182 
Ranks Above Police Officers $35,846 
Average For Unit $31,573 
In addition to the salaries above, provision is made for payment of reporting time, night shift differential, court time, holiday pay and uniforms. 
) 
Position of the Police Benevolent Association 
The PBA seeks a salary increase of twelve (12%) effective July 1, 1990, and a twelve (12%) salary increase effective July ,;•·1991. The City makes no salary proposal. The Association supports its proposed salary increases on the bases of comparable salaries received by other police officers in similar jurisdictions, the hazardousness nature of the work performed by police officers, and the pa_ttern of salary increases received in the past in comparison with 
\ 
! 
: 
() 
7 
police units in other cities and in other employee units employed by the City of Buffalo. The PBA maintains that the proper comparables are those used by 
......... 
compulsory interest arbitration panels in previous years, specifically, the Sands 
0 
panel. Those jurisdictions used by the Sands panel for comparison of salaries and other benefits are the counties of Nassau and Suffolk, the cities of New York, Syracuse, Rochester, and Yonkers, and the towns of Amherst, Cheek­
0 
towaga and Tonawanda. 
A comparison of the Sands panel nine-unit average salaries with Buffalo police salaries reveals that Buffalo police salaries are substantially lower. Salaries for Buffalo police officers are $10,331 lower than the average of those of Suffolk County, Nassau County, New York City, Syracuse, Rochester and
) 
Yonkers, which is equal to a 33.6 percent difference. Comparing Buffalo's salaries with those of the towns of Amherst, Cheektowaga and Tonawanda, a deficit of $3,923 is experienced, resulting in Buffalo police officers salaries being approximately 12.8 percent less than the average of those towns. 
The PBA argues that, " ... a Buffalo police officer is seriously underpaid whether compared on a thirty-three municipality basis, using the comparables found appropriate by the Sands panel, or using even more limited comparables ) [the Cities of Rochester and Syracuse and the largest suburban towns of Amherst, C::heektowaga and Tonawanda]. This is true whether a comparison is .) made on the basis of total annual earnings or total cumulative career earnings. 
.. ' 
8 
When the thirty-three municipality comparables are used, the disparity, on average exceeds twelve (12%) percent. When the Sands panel comparables are used, the disparity exceeds, on average, twenty-four {24%) percent. When a more limited five mu~i;ipality comparison is done, the disparity exceeds eleven and one-half {11.5) percent" [PBA Post-Hearing Memorandum, pp. 26-27]. The PIBA asserts that its proposed increase in salary is not only equitable, but fully justified as well.
C) 
Position of the City of Buffalo 
The City of Buffalo contends that the comparables used by the PBA in its argument for salary increases are inappropriate. Stating that its use of the criteria of geographical proximity, population and union representation, its
) 
selection of comparable units are {a} Erie County cities and towns of Buffalo, Amherst, Cheektowaga, Depew, East Aurora, Town of Hamburg, Town of 
) 
Lancaster, Village of Lancaster, City of Tonawanda, Town of Tonawanda, and West Seneca; (b) Niagara County cities of Lockport, Niagara Falls, North Tonawanda; and, (c} other large cities in Western !'few York of Rochester and Syracuse. 
The City resists a salary increase on the grounds that the City is simply unable to pay. According to the City, "Buffalo is currently struggling for economic ~urvival" [City Post-Hearing Brief, p. 8]. The City of Buffalo is heavily 
J dependent on state aid. Over one-half of the City's budget was State funded 
() 
9 in 1991. The proportion of State aid fell in recent years, and the decrease has created a shortfall of over $13 million, which the City has made up by
0 
increasing the property tax by 9.5%, deleting 117 funded jobs, elimination of 59 positions in the police department, and increased the use of the attrition 
0 
factor from 3.0% to 3.5% on all jobs for all departments in the City. Even with 
these measures, the City comptroller projected an $11.7 million budget 
imbalance by the end of the 1991-92 fiscal year.
() 
If the budget deficit grows, it would create additional fiscal and financial problems including higher costs incurreq in issuing long-term debt and other financial obligations. 
In addition to the loss in state aid, adverse economic conditions which the national economy has experienced has fallen particularly hard on the City
) 
of Buffalo. Unemployment applications filed in Erie County have reached 6.9%, 
. 
coupled with an ·additional net loss of 9,100 jobs. The number of bankruptcies were at a record high in recent years, with 4,000 in 1990, and 4,409 in 1991. 
.,...
Discussion on Salary 
The issue of appropriate comparable police departments musf be . 
addressed first. Both parties use some of the same cities and towns for 
comparison purposes, but their general concepts differ. The PBA chose the 
. J units used by the Sands panel, which includes New York City, and two counties (Suffolk and Nassau) and one city (Yonkers) in the Greater New York Metropoli­
C) 
10 tan Area. Apparently, the Sands panel selected on the basis of size of departments. The City, on the other hand, chose cities, towns and other · political subdivisions in the Buffalo area, including Erie and Niagara Counties, as well as the upstate New York larger cities of Rochester and Syracuse .. 

a 
A selection of units for wage and salary comparisons must be based on meaningful criteria. In the instant case, police departments of other jurisdictions 
C) inust be comparable in significant ways to the Buffalo police department. Most labor economists and other labor practitioners would agree that one critical criterion of comparability is geographical proximity, that is, the relevant labor market area for the occupational group under consideration. If two police departments, for example, draw their personnel from the same competitive 
' locality, the criterion of geographical proximity is satisfied. However,
'.) 
geographical proximity is not the only relevant criterion. If, within a particular geographic area, a large city does not compete with a much smaller political subdivision for personnel, geographical proximity is irrelevant. The labor market area for the two units are separate and distinct. In like manner, two 
... . 
large city police forces may be comparable even if they are· relatively distant 
from each other if size of city, price levels, -size-of police force, and other ~ctors 
are relatively equal. 
i 
~ 
I.~) Considering the criteria ~f similar labor market area, similar size and 
I 
function of police force, and other economic factors, it is possible to conclude that jurisdictions such as New York City, Yonkers, Suffolk and Nassau Counties 

() 
11 are not appropriate for comparisons with Buffalo. New York City and its police force, obviously, is substantially larger than Buffalo, and some of its-problems · are of a substantially different nature. In addi_t_i9n to size, the New York Greater Metropolitan Area, including Yonkers, Nassau and Suffolk Counties, has a 

'.J 
significantly different set of economic conditions. Prices and the Consumer Price Index are substantially higher, salaries in general are substantially higher, 
'.) and police officer salaries in particular are substantially higher. The area's population is more than half the population of the entire state. Therefore, conditions in that area are so substantially different that a comparison with Buffalo is meaningless. 
Syracuse and Rochester are two larger cities in the State, and are outside the New York Metropolitan Area. Their police forces and populations, although not equal in size to those of Buffalo, are sufficiently large to permit credible comparisons. 
On the other hand, certain proximate jurisdictions cited by the City are 
so small and do not derive their employees from the same labor pool as does 
.,.. 
Buffalo that they cannot be reasonably ·considered comparable. Examples of such jurisdictions are East Aurora with a 14-person police force, Lancaste~ Village with a total of 15 in the police department, the City of Tonawanda with a total of 31 persons in the police department. 
Considering the criteria of competitive labor market area, population of jurisdiction, size of police force, and other economic factors, an appropriate 
/' 
() 
12 
grouping of jurisdiction for comparison with Buffalo would be larger jurisdic­
() 
tions within the Buffalo area and larger cities outside the Buffalo areai but also · outside the Metropolitan New York City Area. That grouping would be the towns of Amherst, Cheektowaga and Tonawanda, as well as the cities of 
Syracuse and Rochester. 
All the evidence affirms that salaries of Buffalo police officers lag behind those of comparable police forces. The City denies the assertion of the PBA, stating that, "the PBA's members have fared well in terms of wages and 
C) 
benefits. A comparison of these wages and benefits to those in Buffalo's market basket area reveals that Buffalo's officers lead the average salaries in every category" [City Post-Hearing Reply Brief, p. 1). The City's conclusion rests
) 
on the use of a grouping which contains some inappropriate jurisdictions. Removing those inappropriate jurisdictions results in data which show that Buffalo police officers are in an inferior position relative to comparable 
jurisdictions. 
.... 
The City asserts that even if a difference exists, the City's finances are -.. such that it just cannoi'afford to increase salaries at this time. The response of the PBA to the City's position is that the City has taken the same position "in every past interest arbitration proceeding since the present mayor has been mayor'' [PBA Post-Hearing Reply Brief, p. 7). When the City 
. ·) and PBA went through an interest arbitration with the Drotning panel, the City 
() 
13 claimed that it could not pay salary increases, yet the Drotning panel awarded 7.7% and 6.8% salary increases which the City absorbed withoui incurring budget deficits or incurring significant tax increases. Between 1977 and 1989, the City property tax levy increase-d only 11.3%. There were no real property tax increases in 1989 and 1990. The City claimed inability to pay when its representatives testified before the Sands panel. For 1989-?0, both police and fire were awarded twenty

() 
p~rcent salary increases which the City not only paid but the City ended the fiscal year of 1989-90 with a $10.8 million surplus. 
The City's witness, Thomas F. Keenan, City Budget Director, testified that the City was not "crying wolf' this time, that the fiscal problems it faces are real. " ... a number of events that have occurred over the last several months make 
( ) 
i 
j 
some of the doom and doom news.... reality as opposed to conjecture ... the Comptroller ... reported a deficit for the City's general fund for the first time in overfourteen years... the state government has indeed cutthe amount of general purpose revenue•.." [franscript, p. 357-58]. 
.,.. 
There is no doubt that the City of Buffalo is experiencing a difficult financial period. A combination of reduced revenues from the state, the current recession, and rising material, insurance and other costs have contributed to budget difficulties. These difficulties require a tempering of salary increases for police officers, but for competitive and other purposes, a salary increase is 
() 

14 appropriate. To deny a salary increase for police officers would be inequitable because City firefighters recently received salary increases, 11s weir-as police 
officers in other jurisdictions. Were this panel to award no salary increase, police officers in the City would be seriously underpaid compared to other units, creating not only a decrease in morale and possibly productivity, but tne City could lose a substantial number of highly effective police officers who would seek employment elsewhere. In addition, recruiting would be more difficult, creating still greater personnel problems. 
It is the opinion of the Public Arbitration Panel that the salary Award herein is a fair and equitable salary increase. 

Based up.on the evidence and arguments presented by the respective 
parties, the Public Arbitration Panel AWAADS salary increases as follows: 
Effective July 1, 1990, salary shall be increased by four (4%) percent. Effective January 1, 1991, salary shall be increased QY four (4%) percent. Effective July 1, 1991, salary shall be increased by Tour (4%) percent. 

15 EDUCAllONINCENllVE The Associatio.n proposes an education incentive for police officers. Its 
· specific proposal is: 
All bargaining unit members shall receive, as additional compen­sation, an education incentive based on the following percentages of the members top base salary 
DEGREE/CREDIT HOURS (IN PERCENT) 
Associate's Degree (AAS) .................... ~................. 2.0 Bachelor's Degree (BA or BS)................................. 4.0 Bachelor's Degree -Relevant Field ............ :::........ 6.0 Master's or Professional Degree (MA, MS, JD)..... 8.0 
Position of the Police Benevolent Association 
The Association argues that a highly educated police officer is essential in today's society. The responsibilities of a police officer are so varied that education is a must. The PBA asserts that if a police officer has a college education (s)he will develop an ability to rely on his or her own judgment, use discretion properly, and apply policing to a variety of crisis situations. College educated police will being new ideas, an environment for change, and a more
~-. . sensitive approach to their duties. An education incentive has the added value 
of attracting more qualified personnel to police work. 
Many cities, towns and villages have realized the.advantage of education 
and have enacted education incentives. Some of those jurisdictions are the City . of Rochester, the City of North Tonawanda, the City of Lockport, the Village of 
East Aurora, the Town of Amherst, and the Town of Cheektowaga. 
16 Finally, the PBA argues that the Salary Review Commission sponsored by the City of Buffalo Common Council recommended a salary educatiol'I incentive in 1988, as well the International Chiefs of Police Report commissioned by the City of Buffa lo in 1990. 

(} 
Position of the City of Buffalo 
The City states that, "while the desire of a police officer to improve himself is commendable, the City is regrettably not in the position to pay a stipend for such" [City Post-Hearing Reply Brief, p. 23]. The City believes that 
.o 
the PBA proposal is excessive relative to other units. The Common Council's Report provided for a maximum stipend of $300.00 for an Associate's Degree, and $600.00 for a Bachelor's Degree. The City's resources simply do not permit 
) such a drastic increase sought by the PBA. 
Discussion on Educational Incentive 
The arguments presented by the Association are well thought through . . ..... and valid. This Public Arbitration Panel embraces tlie concept of an education .·­
incentive. However, the City is currently experiencing finaric:iai difficultie§. and adding the percentage increases to salary proposed by the PBA for education incentive, in addition to the salary awarded above would place too great a burden on .the City at the present tiroe. We recommend that the City and the PBA negotiate an education incentive with a modest stipend initially. This 
17 
would accomplish the goal of alerting police officers to the City's acknowledge-
CJ 
ment of the value of education for police officers, and at the same time fit 
. within the financial constraints experienced by the City. 
The Public Arbitration Panel, while embracing the concept of an 
education incentive, and recommending that the two parties negotiate such a 
clause, makes no AWARD on this issue. 
() 

HEALTH INSURANCE 
The PBA had proposed, and the City had tentatively agreed, that for health care coverage, Rider 14 of the Blue Cross and Blue Shield program, be 
replaced with Rider 21. Although City representatives tentatively agreed to the proposal, the Public Arbitration Panel, in its deliberations on the issue, concluded that Rider 14, while less expensive to the City than Rider 21, actually provided greater coverage for the expressed needs of the PBA. Therefore, we make the following AWARD: 
) The current Rider 14 is to remain as part of the health insurance coverage, and Rider 21 is rescinded. 

18 SICK LEAVE (CONFINEMENTI 

The City proposes a confinement policy. Presently, no cof!lfinement 
policy exists. The City's proposed clause is as follows: 
0 (a) Unless otherwise authorized by the Commissioner, or his designated representative, a member of the Department on sick leave will not leave his residence or place of confine­ment except for: 
(1) obtaining professional medical treatm~nt; 
, ... 
(2) performing exercise prescribed in writing by his physician which is part of his recovery treatment, a copy of which must be submitted to his Commanding Officer prior to com­mencing such exercise. 
(b) Permission to leave the residence for reasons other than cited above must be documented, in writing, by the employee's commanding officer. 
Position of the City of Buffalo 
The City argues that there has been an increase in the use of both sick leave and 100 (Injured on duty) time since 1982. The confinement policy would not harm anyone. Those officers who are truly sick \,\!OUld normally be at home 
) during their shift at any rate. Individuals who are injured and who are able to get out and about can seek permission to do so. The policy would permit the Department to monitor sick leave usage with periodic phone calls or visits. 
Other departments in the area have a confinement policy, notably Amherst, the Town of Lancaster, the City of North Tonawanda, and the Town 
of Tonawanda. 
19 Position of the Police Benevolent Association 

The Association objects to the City's inclusion of 10D time far confine­
ment, stating that the City's proposal submitted for interest arbitration excluded  
IOD time.  The PBA argues that officers who report off sick not only see the  
0  Department surgeon weekly, but I.A.D. weekly.  Those officers are subject to  
periodic phone calls or visits.  If an officer abuses his sick leave privileges, he  
0  is subject to formal  disciplinary charges.  There has  not  been  a  single  
established case of abuse; therefore, there is no reason to disturb the establish­ 
ed practice.  
Discussion on Confinement Policy  
Although this Public Arbitration Panel does not believe that excessive sick  
leave abuse occurs among officers of the Department, a confinement policy  
limited to an  individual's tour of duty will discourage any person from  an  
attempt in the future to abuse it. The confinement policy does not affect those  
officers who do not take sick leave, nor does it affect those officers who are ill  
and confined to their homes or hospitals. A person With the flu or other illness  
)  
would not feel like going out of his home. The person whom the polic\i.would  
effect is an individual who has an arm or a leg in a cast, or have some other off­ 
duty injury or illness which prevents him  or her from performing his or her  
duties as a police officer, but who has some ambulatory capacity. But, the City  

() 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 ) 
) 
20 
argues that a person in that situation could get permission to leave his or her 
home. · This Public Arbitration Panel believes that the City's proposal does no 
harm to police officers who are ill, and may discourage potential sick leave abuse. This Public Arbitration Panel agrees with the PBA that the issue presented before it excluded 10D (injured on duty) personnel, and the City's proposal presented above reflects that. Therefore we make the following 
AWARD: 
A new clause shall be added to the Agreement which specifies a confinement policy as stated above as the City's proposal. 
DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE 
Article XII of the Agreement contains definitions and procedures concerning disciplinary action. Section 12.2 (D) currently is the following: 
The impartial hearing officer so selected and so designated shall be vestf;ld with all the powers of the Commisllioner of Police and shall make a record of such conference": His findings and recommendations shall then be referred to the Commissioner of Police for review and decision. ... 
The PBA proposes deleting the last sentence of that paragraph and 
substituting it with the following sentence: . . 
The hearing officer, mutually selected by the parties, shall have authority to render final and binding determination. 
j 
_j 
21 
Position of the Police Benevolent Association 
El 0 
The Association states that under the present Agreement, the hearing · officer may only make findings and recommendations which are referred to the 
Commissioner of Police for review and decision.· It states: "While the mutually 
() 
appointed hearing officer is empowered to determine whether the City has met its burden of proof, the Commissioner of Police, who initially authorizes the service of charges, is the ultimate determinator" [PBA Post-Hearing Brief, p. 57]. The PBA further states: "As is evident from Joint Exhibit No. 2, the Commis­sioner frequently does not follow the recommended penalty" [PBA Post-Hearing Brief, p. 57]. The PBA charges that the Commissioner has found guilt even after the hearing officer recommended dismissal of charges. Of twenty disciplinary cases, the Commissioner followed the hearing officer's recom._
l 
mendation less than fifty-percent of the time. The PBA further asserts that there are a number of instances in which an officer has plead guilty and sustained a pre-stated lesser penalty because he or she felt that there would not be a fair review following a formal hearing. 
The PBA states: ''The substitution of a neutrafarbitrator empowered to 
... 
render final and binding determination for a hearing officer will better 'protect 
each officer's due process rights" [PBA Post-Hearing Brief, p. 58]. J 
\ ) 
' 
_; 

22 Position of the City of Buffalo The City opposes the Association's proposal. It asks tRe Public · Arbitration Panel to take judicial note that due process requires only that an individual be apprised of the charges and be given an opportunity to respond.

() 
The current section of the Agreement far exceeds those minimal rights. 
Discussion on Discipline and Discharge When a person is charged with actions that will result in discipline or discharge, that individual must have the right of due process, that is (s}he must
. 
be apprised of the charges, and must receive a full and fair hearing. If found guilty, the severity of the penalty must be consonant with the infraction. 
At some point in the past, the City and the PBA negotiated the present discipline and discharge section of the Agreement. It is noted that similar language is included in the Agreements of other bargaining units within the City. None of the eight bargaining units in the City have Agreements which contain a binding arbitration clause. 
'• 
Although the City is consistent in its disciplr~e and discharge clause
) 
among the various bargaining units, the high incrdence of changes in the hearing officers' recommended penalty is cause for concern. Also cause for concern to the extent that i.t occurs, is the fact that individuals plead guilty to charges of which they are innocent out of fear of more substantial penalty. 
23 
The Public Arbitration Panel does not wish to decrease the role of the 
Commissioner of Police in this process, nor does it wish to completely alter the 
gene·ral thrust of Article 12.2. The Award below, while adding one layer to the 
process, thus making it somewhat cumbersome, is intended to permit the
0 
process to continue as before, while at the same time provide an avenue of 
appeal for any police officer who believes that an increase in penalty recom­
0 
mended by the hearing officer is unjustified. 
The Public Arbitration Panel makes the following AWARD 
Add the following to Section 12.2 (D): 
If the Union disagrees with the decision of the Commissioner of 
) . Police to change the decision recommended by the Hearing Officer, it may seek review of such change in decision by an arbitrator mutually selected by the parties through the American Arbitration Association within seven (7) calendar days after service of the Commissioner's decision. It is understood that such arbitrator shall not be authorized to conduct a rehearing of the matter, but only to review the record of the proceeding to determine whether the change in decision by the Commissioner was supported by substantial evidence in the record. If the 
· arbitrator so determines, he shall have the a~hority to award an appropriate remedy which· shall be final and binding upon the parties and the police officer inv..olv~d. It is further understood that the cost of such arbitration shall be shared equally between the parties. 
() 24 
MAJNTENANCE OF BENEFITS The current Agreement contains the following maintenance of benefits clause:
0 
All conditions or provisions beneficial to employees now in effect which are not specifically provided for in this Agreement or which have not been replaced by provisions of this Agreement shall remain in effect for the duration of this Agreement, unless mutually agreed otheiwise between the City and the Union. 
The City seeks to remove this clause from the Agreement. 
I'.) 
I 
) Position of the City of Buffalo 
The City states that, "[G]iven the current fiscal plight the City now faces, it cannot afford to play games with a catch-all clause such as that above. The City must know what its potential liability is under this clause." The City is willi_~g to incorporate specific conditions or practices relating to terms and 
.... 
conditions of employment into the contract, but those conditions must be clearly identified by the PBA. 
j ) 
Position of the Police Benevolent Association The-Association argues that the City has presented no facts to support its proposal. Although the City pleads ignorance as to the meaning of the 
() 
25 Article, the meaning is well understood because it has been in a series of Agreements between the City and the PBA. 

Discussion on Maintenance of Benefits Clause 
0 
If this Public Arbitration Panel were to award the City's proposal, it would 
' 
in fact potentially eliminate so'me terms and conditions of employment enjoyed 
0 by the bargaining unit that are established practices which are have not been reduced to writing in the Agreement. It may be argued that all recognized terms and conditions of employment should be identified and placed in an agreement, that was not the charge placed before this Public Arbitration Panel. Therefore, we decline to award the City's proposal. 


SHIFTS 
Section 2.2 of the Agreement provides for three shifts of fixed time: 
..... 
7:30 a.m to 3:30 p.m. 
3:30 p.m. to 11:30 p.m. 
11 :30 p.m. to 7:30 a.m. 
The -current policy is for a 5-2 "double back'' shift. Under this arrange­ment, there is a 42-day cycle, within which police officers work 26 days. 
26 

The City seeks to alter the shift system to provide for a straight 5-2, eight-hour shift schedule, with a fourth "power shift." 
Position of the City of Buffalo 
The City seeks the shift change because it has a lower "relief factor," and is more efficient because it permits 71.4% of the manpower to be scheduled at any one time, compared with the present 65.7%. 
Buffalo is the only Department within the comparables that has a double­back shift. 
With the double-back shift, one-third of available manpower is scheduled off each weekend, and 68.7 officers report off on average each day. Given this, ) approximately 249 officers are off each day of every weekend, leaving too few 
officers available to respond to calls:·· 
Officers work both second and third shift on a rotational basis on the double-back shift. This is harmful to both officers and citizens because the schedule is inflexible. Staffing is distributed fairly evenly by time of day and day of week. The most obvious discrepancy, accor~iing to the City, is on the second and third shifts on Saturdays, and the third shift on Sundays. More officers are needed on those shifts than the present system provides. 
· · In addition, with the rotational shifts, the constant change in work hours is destructive to steep patterns. 
27  
Position of the Police Benevolent Association  
The Association  states  that the  City does  not  propose  a  particular  
, schedule whether 'it be a 5-2, 4-4, 4-3, 4-2, or other possible schedule.  Nor  
0  does the City propose any definitive set or set starting and quitting times. The City's proposal does propose an increase in work hours since employees now  
work eight hours inclusive of. lunch, whereas under the City's proposal  they  
()  would work an eight-hour day exclusive of lunch.  
The PBA argues that other than the assertion that a straight 5-2 schedule  
'O  would result in better deployment, the City has presented no evidence justifying a change in the schedule. "Given the absence of specifics as to what is  
encompassed within the City's proposal as well as failure to present compelling  


data supporting the straight 5-2 •schedule .... there is insuf.ficient evidence in the record to change the existing provisions" [PBA Post-Hearing Brief, pp. 62-63]. 
,,., 
Discussion on Shifts
) 
The report, Policing Buffalo In the Nineties, submitted by the International Association of Police Chiefs [City Exhibit No. 12], recommends that the present double-back shift scheduling ,be eliminated in order to increase the efficiency of operations, provide greater service to the residents of Buffalo, and increase productivity in general. 
28 
This Public Arbitration Panel believes that a change in shift schedule will 
e) 
provide for greater flexibility and efficiency of operations, and it endorses a 
· movement away from the 5-2 double back shift system with rotating shifts. 
However, the Panel is not convinced that the straight 5-2 is the best alternative. 
0 
At the same time it is not convinced that the straight 5-2 shift system is not the 
most efficient pattern. The Public Arbitration Panel has not been provideq with 
() 
sufficient information to make that judgment, although with the limited 
information it has, it appears that the straight 5-2 shift system would be 
appropriate for this City of Buffalo Police Department. 
0 
Because of the relative inefficiency of the modified 5-2 shift system (the 
double back system), this Public Arbitration Panel makes the following AWAAD: 
) 
The parties are directed to negotiate a change from the modified 5-2 double back shift to either a straight 5-2-8 hour shift or some other more efficient pattern mutually acceptable to the parties. If 
'.) negotiations do not result in agreement after a period of six months after issuance of this Award, the unresolved issues may be submitted to arbitration by either party using the procedures of the American Arbitration Association. 
.... 
29 

ONE MAN PATROLS 
· The City of Buffalo uses two-man vehicles for police patrol service. The 
City seeks to establish a combination of one/two person vehicles, and makes 
the following proposal: 
(A) A committee of equal City/PBA membership be formed to 
C) 
study and discuss such matters as: 
(i) 
safety 

(ii) 
bargaining unit impact 


(iii) recommended implementation of the combined one/two man patrol 
(B) The Committee makes effective recommendations to the Commissioner of Police. 

(C) The Commissioner will give the PBA and the Committee at least six (6) months notice prio.r. to his intent to implement the one man/two man vehicle system. 
(D) Unresolved matters involving safety and/or bargaining unit impact, as they affect terms and conditions of employment as defined by the Taylor Law, may be submitted to interest arbitration by either the City or the PBA prior to the Commissioner's implementa­
tion. 
.,.. 
Position of the City of Buffalo 
Buffalo remains one of a group of major cities that maintains almost 
exclusive reliance on two-man cars. This system has led to "stacking" of calls 
wherein dispatchers give several calls to one unit. Officers may not be able to 
respond to all the calls because of the lack of time. 
() 
30 The fiscal state of the City of Buffalo demands a more efficient use of services, and a well-planned use of one/mo man vehicles will "enhance the · efficient and effective use of polii::e services" [City Post-Hearing Brief, p. 28], 
Position of the Police Benevolent Association 
The PBA avers that the City's proposal is unclear. It states that it is clear that the City wishes to ultimately establish a combination of one/two man vehicles, " ... it is unclear whether ... the City is asking that this panel approve a concept, a procedure, or an implementation" [PBA Post-Hearing Brief, p. 70J. 
() 
The PBA believes that the issue should be deferred to the next round of negotiations. 
u ) 
-·.
Discussion on One Man Patrols 
The report submitted by the International Association of Chiefs of Police recommends one/two person patrols. The arguments by the City regarding the effici~ncy, flexibility, and cost-saving aspects of a change to a combination of 
.,.. 
one-person/two-person patrol vehicles is impressive. This Public Arbitration Panel heartily endorses the concept of one/two person patrol vehicles so long as officer safety concerns are met. However, it cannot award the City's proposal as it is written because of the immense problems of implementation. The City's proposal would permit the implementation of the system within six 
31 months, and any and all problems flowing from that implementation be resolved as they arise. · As tempting and reasonably rational as that proposal sounds, it carries with it severe limitations. For example, the City, in arguing for the proposal states: "Operating a one-man/two-man patrol system will require the Depart­ment to have a superior dis.patch discipline, unfailing back-up procedures, stronger field supervision, better equipment, and officers better trained in police field procedures. Properly done, a complete move to a one-person/two-person patrol system could take three (3) to five (5) years to accomplish" [City Post­Hearing Brief, p. 29]. The Association informs the Panel that Jerome Needle's letter of July 22, .. 1991, cautioned that the one-man/two-man patrol system "must be done. with total regard for officer safety ... Conversion must be part of a package of changes, all put in place prior to actual implementation" [PBA Post-Hearing Brief, p. 70]. The report then goes on to state that the new CAD ·system is critical, dispatchers must be trained, better vehicles must be purchased, body 
'• .,.. 
armor, batons, support training, and other items must be provided. It is clear that the implementation of one-person patrols must be preceded by careful planning, the acquisition of certain types of equipment, and 
i .) 
,roper training of particular personnel. The actual implementation will have ----, ne substantial impact on terms and conditions of employment, and such 
11. ct should be anticipated as thoroughly as possible. 
32 The issues and problems in implementing the plan are so complex that 
the concept of a committee suggested by the City is an excellent suggestion. 
But, because those issues and problems are so complex, it is not possible for 
this Public Arbitration Panel to endorse the City's proposal to provide the 
Commissioner with the ability to implement the procedure at his will. The Public Arbitration Panel endorses the concept of one-person/two­person patrol vehicles, and makes the following AWAF.D: 
A Committee of equal City of Buffalo/Police Benevolent Associa­tion membership is to be formed to study and discuss such matters as safety, bargaining unit impact, and other items regarding a shift to one-person/two-person patrol vehicles. The total number of members is to be mutually determined by the City and the PBA. 
The Committee shall make effective recommendations to the
) 
Commissioner of Police. 
The City and the PBA shall negotiate a timetable for the imple­
mentation of one-person/two-person patrols. 
) 
OTHER ISSUES .,... 
The City o~ Buffalo withdrew its proposal regarding Union Release Time. Other issues presented to the Public Arbitration Panel which were examined, evaluated and rejected are the following: Reporting Time (PBA); Vacations (PBA); Sick Leave Incentive (PBA); Uniform Allowance (PBA); Dental Coverage 
(PBA); Longevity (PBA); Sick Leave Abuse (City); Overtime (City); Seniority 
(City); Reporting Time (City); Health Insurance (City). All other provisions and 
33 
language contained in the Agreement are hereby continued, except as specifically modified in this Award. 
() 
Respectfully submitted, 

Peter A. Prosper 

l (concur) 
u ) 
Date: 
p..P'fr-. 
I (concur) 
Public Panel Member and Chairman 
(do not concur) with the Above Award 
Joseph L. Randazzo, Esq .. Employer Panel Member 
(<.P?-'-. 
(d t • r i!r) with the Above Award ,.. 

Date~_j,.,.,.,,,_ ,;;l. 5/ /7'1.;L-=f.:.;:;fl;~,-Zf_...£:.~~~~~~~::.__o-·-Robert P. Meegan, 
r. Employee Organiza · 
() 

STATE OF NEW YORK COUNTY OF 
34 
) 
) SS: 
On this day of , 1992, before me personally came and appeared JOSEPH L. RANDAZZO, to me known and known to me to be the individual described in and who executed the foregoing instrument and he acknowledged to me that he executed the same. 
STATE OF NEW YORK 
COUNTY OF 0z1e 
) ) SS: 
On this 2.o~ day of -:::S-0ne__ , 1992, before me personally came and appeared ROBERT P. MEEGAN, JR., to me known and known to mete be the individual described in and who executed the foregoing instrument and he acknowledged to me that he executed the same. 
'.) 
STATE OF NE\fy' ),'ORK 1.,. /.,IA,, )~. COUNTY OF -J~<1-l )SS: 

On this 2,..rd day of~ , 1992, before me personally came and appeared PETfR A. PROSPER, to me known and known to me to be the individual described in and who executed the foregoing instrument and he acknowledged to me that he executed the same. 

j 
---, 


0 
() 




VIII. 
v 
1988 -1990 Sands 

C) 
j 
~ 
-11 i1,J 

I 

C) 

n STATE OF NEW YORK 
PUBLIC EMPLOYMENT RELATIONS BOA.RD ~~-6..SE NOS,
In the Hatter of the Inter est Arbi trati on 
IABB-29; M88-3 45 Between 
CITY OF-B0FFALO, JS Case No. 0 Public Ernpl oy er 1 1423 And 
BUFFALO POLICE BENEI/OLENT ASSOCIATION, lllC., OPINION Employee Organization AND 
NilARD 
0 Beior e the :?ublic Arbitration Panel: 
JOEN E. SANDS, Public Member and Chairman RICBARD PLANAVSKY, Public Employer Ma~ber ROBERT P. MEEGAN, Employee Organization Member 
() 
OPINION 
) 
T::iis interest arbitration case arises under Section 
209.4 o;: New York State's Civil Service Law. On December 2 8, 1988 PERB Chairman Earold R. Newman appointed this Public Arbitration Pa:.el to make a just and reasonable determir.ation oi t..'1e parties' collec-cive bargaining ira?<>sse. 

hearings in Buffalo, New York on May 10, ll, and 12, _19E9. Bot:i sices appeared by CO\!."lsel and had ft.:.ll opportu..'1ity to adduce evidence, to c:ossexa.-:ir.e each other's witnesses, and to make· argument in ~upport of t.'1eir respective positions. Each submit­

brie:s, and neit!ler ~.as raised objection to the 
fairness of t..~is proceeding. 
\ 

2 SEP 1 9 1989 
This Panel met in executive session in Buffalo on July 
(J27, 1989. We have reviewed all of the par ties' evidence and 
arguments taking into consideration Section 209,4 (c) (v) 's express 
criteria: 
0 a. comparison of the wages, hours and conditions of employment of the employees involved in the arbitration proceeding with the wages, hours, and conditions of employment of other employees performing similar services or requiring similar skills under similar working conditions and with other employees generally in public and private empl oymant in comparable communi ti es. 
b. the interests and welfare of the pub1ic and the financial ability of the public employer to pay; 
c, comp:irison of peculiarities in regard to other 
0 trades or professions, including specifically, (1) hazards of er.ployr.ient; (2) physical qualifications; (3) educational qualificatioris; (4) mental qualifications; (5) job training and skills; 
d. the terms of collective agreements negotiated
) 
between the parties in the past providing for compensation and fringe benefits, including, but not limited to, the provisions for salary, insurance and retire...ent bene:its, meciical and hospitalization bene£its, paid time off and jobsecurity. 
() 
Upc :1 co.nside:ation, a ruaj er-i ty of us have• reac!'le::! 
the =ollOwi::~ relevant c::>ncl!.:sions. 

Firs':, bo-:..1 in absolute and r_elative te::w.s, Buffalo 
:police co;;;per:.sation lags fa;:: behind that of com:::arabl e e.:;,Joyees and behind releva.~t ave::-ages as well. 



:iSEP 1 9 1989 
·pepart;roent Effective Police officer Irs. to Buffalo Deficit DAU Minimum / MaximUlll liU at Maximum In $$$ / In \\,\ 
Suffolk Cty 1/1/88 23,914 // 42,592 5.0 17,039 / 66,7\ Nassau Cty 1/1/88 28,620 43 , 9 2 7 5,0 18,374 / 71.9 % New York City 7 / 1/88 25,977 / 34,633 5.0 9 IO 80 / 35.5% Syracuse 1/1/88 23,749 / 28,831 4.0 3,278 / 12.8% Rochester 7/1/88 23,105/ 33,007 2.7 7,454 / 29.2% Yonkers 3/1/88 26,686 / 35,094 4.0 9,s 41 / 37 .3% 
AVE.RAGE 25,342 / 36,347 4.3 10,794 I 42.2% 
Amherst 1/1/88 20,163 / 29,001 3,0 3,448 13 .5% 
C) Cheektowaga 1/1/88 23,338/ 30,832 3,0 5,279 ~ 20.7% Tonawancia Twn 1/1/88 22,279 / 30,388 4, 0 4,835 I 18. 9% 
AVERAGE 21,9.27 / 30,_074. 3,3 4,s2i / 11.7., Buffalo 1/1/88 1a,900 I 2s,ss3 4.0 XXX / XXX 
In connection with that subject, a majority of us find 
) unpersi..asive the City's argument that Buffalo police are appro­priately _;;.aid when considered (a) against a nationwide list of cities identified by an ingenious "cluster analysis" of demo­c;::a:;::hic, cri;;ie and budget characteristics and (b) against local 
c::-::-_·:u.:....,ity Ca~a statis~ically adjus-=ea to neutralize local income C':!.fferen~i a!.s. 
.,.. 
) 
The City's nationwide list of comparables, alth.ougb c:iosen on a co.:s::.stently applied statistical basis, fails to 
I, re::lec-::: co::e relevant region.al impellei:s of com;,ensa·tion levels. The statuto:y context in which wase dete::mination occurs, foi: 
_; exa.'llple, will"· have more to do than per capita se::io:.:s ci:ime data 
, J with dete::mining police com.,_::,ensation. .All large New; York State 'cities mus-:: negotiate under the Taylor La,1 with p:ilitically 

5 SEP 1 a\9.89 
It must be clear that the relatively low rnaximW11 and sta.rting sa.lary for Buffalo Police Officers cannot be corrected by this award since the mount of the adjustment
0 would bankrupt the City. However, the difference should not be allowed to increase a.nd the gap narrowed to some extent. 
[Union Exhibits A-91 and A-140, p, 31.J 
0 
Al though Buffalo now enjoys vastly improved ab~lity-to­pay by reason of effective and responsible fiscal and political 
o management, the need for a dramatic catch-up in police compensa­ti on has n-ot changed. Indeed, even Buffalo's Common Council has certified that fact, ln 1988 the Common Council established a 
O tri-partite, "blue ribbon" Committee to Review Police Salaries.· That Committee met and reviewed much of the same data the parties have presented to this Public Arbitration Panel. .And it concl u­
;} ) ::ed 1.1itho-u,: ci s~0 'lt that, before any interest arbitration pro­ceedins; to determine appropriate current compensation, Buffalo police r.n::s::. receive an irn.'"neciiate, tell-percent wage increase 
u across-;:,.-,. e--boa rd. The Co:.t.':littee noted, also without dissent, 
t;,.at t.:le c.:.:.y cou2.d recou? some of t...'le c:ist c:E t.i-iat increase by 

• • [S]uc:i con::roversial issues raised by tbe City as 
s~!:-: =e:.li;;::.::.e:it, jurliciou.s t:.se of one-office.: ,Patrol cars, 
i:ic:ease::5 i.:.se oi civilians in support p:>sit.ions a::.d 
tele:::ic::e ::e::ortinc for certain matters are exam-oles of s01ue 
cf ::Se -.::olicies and n:ocedures this Co=it~ee reco=ends be 
ex:;:·.:.ored :iy o:fice::s~ police ad:'C.inistration and city _ 
c::::.c.:.a.:.s al.:.ke. These issues, if prc?=rly examined, shoulc 
accress c:ince:ns raised by t.1ie ?:SA, provide additional 
resc::rce-s to fund salary and other benefit increases anc, ·,-,ore i-~r'-•-~iy ensure a ~~--' s'"ent -na· ac~eq•·a~e ~, ice
-· ... -1.i..:'-' ... ....=..;~--, • -\,,,,,,,1£1,::i..1. -c... i.. -::"-... ­
-.-: e.s: ~Ce ; ~ O" r c-i •v
--· ....... ... ..._. 


A :;,,ll!aj or i ty=of--us-~f ii'i"d ~"'tne-~Common~··cci"unc::11 1 s-cwn 
I) CQ.m~i.1;tee...J:,_9_...R~Y..i.ew.,... Pol ic:e·· Salaries1 •. extraordinary -•report ··both 
. / 
com_pelling--and-impossible to ignore. We have therefore decided to grant, effective on the· date of this· Award, the Committee's immediate, •.ten-percent across-the-board increase· of base annual 
0 
poJ._~~e-salaries. computed on the basis of salary levels in effect on the ·date ·of ·the Committee·•s·report. We have also decided to put in place the joint labor-management committee that the Common 
0 
C_ouncil Committee recommended to help address the various opera­tional issues necessary to accomplish its purpose of improving P:,,lice service in Buffalo. 
1,·e note that the City has already enjoyed productivity in the form of more police work accomplished by
. ) i.:;i ;:,r ov e::i e::t s fewe: police officers and· limitations on off-duty employment. !-!ere i;;:port.a:-:t, t:ie City can secure further productivity gains t:iroug:i jucicioi:s use of variable assignments, one-officer· cars ·e, :::.-.: .... .:,•• s.a::e ar:a.s and duties,. and civilianization of 
... ----.,, --: 

1
!-~cse-a:e all wit..1in the City 1 s manage:-ial pre.re­

s;;ch
sa~ive co 
of ~urse, to 
:c::e_:c::i:.:s:::.--::.;.::o.:::;'..:s:..'-=i.:t:"""~""-'"'c,.,.-;:.) anc ,r.o: e "?Ossibl e • to a ccora:;:::l ish successfully 
a:~e: ::c2.ice ~~:::e;;s2:.ion is at tbe level certified a-::rorooriate
-... . -... ­:::y t:ie Co:::...:.on Council's own c::i=ittee to ?.eview ?olice Salaries. t..'iose productivity :L"tlprove:nents and t..1-ie ex.. ,..%,... .. ,.:;.; ... = .,.v, 
o:: t.~e cc=ission' s re?Jrt are such

---tJ.i.. ...._ ....... _ ... 
u.:-.ique factors -::::a-:: no other City bargaining unit should be able 
to j us:.i ::'l 2. simil az ca tch-u:::, adj us't...'Ilent.. 


1 SEP 1 9 1989 
~ 

we further find that, hAv.ing-thu.s"addressed •the·'dr!IJTla .. tic disparity ..between Buffalo police compensation and ..that .in cornparabl e comrriuni ties, _there is ·no ·reason ··for· Buffalo. pol ice, compensation· cith'erwise ·to depart fr011 the five percent/fiv,e P'rrcent two-year ·:·pattern" the City has established and justified for all of its other units . And we will so 

.,.. 

ESEP 1 9 1989 
AHMD 
1. Effective on the date of this Award, the base annual salaries of bargaining unit personnel shall be increased by an amount equal to ten:;.,.per.cent,•.•(10\)"()f the rate in effect on .July 13, 1988, 
2, Effective July"·r;:·•-is·aa a.nd July 1, 1989 the base annual salaries of bargaining unit personnel shall be increased by five percent. Those increases shall· not include any portion
() 
of the preceding paragraph's ten percent adjustment, 
3. If the City retains a municipal law enforcement counsulting organization to address modernization issues, the parties snall establish a joint labor-management committee to consider t.'lose issues and to work wi,..l:h the c:insul tants to facilitate imflementation of modern12"ation programs, 
:): )_. 
concur. 
; JCEN' E Si.NOS 

' 
l Ci SSe!"',t. 

:·) 
J 

I c.oncu r. 


.,.. 

SEP 1 9 1989
9
E} 


KEDICAr, BENEFITS 
u 
C) In this area, a majority of us agree that the Union's demands are appropriate for (a)·· psychiat.ric;..._illn_ess ridet.. to 
,. 
... 
o ~xisting covera.ge and (b) ca.tastrophic illness coverage at thl, base.level .Pf benefits-,for bargaining unit personnel hired on or'
, . . . after Jt.ilY~li 1984 1 \.lho··11ave.. limited.....s'ic:JCleave"benefits;.. Both O demands address situations that involve the unique stresses and perils of police service, and, at a cost of one-;-tenth of one percent, each is well within the City's ability-to-pay, And we (_) so 
AWARD 
Effec-;:.ive on the date of this A:.lard, the City shall
) 
_mprove its mec:ical benefit progr2a11 for bargaining unit oersonnel by addins a rider covering psychiat~illness and coverage for cat.as::ro::ihic illness at the base lefe! of benefits for e:nployees
7\
hi:-ed on o:-afte:-Jcly l,~984. ~ 
. -c O)~
) 
! C:0!1.CU:. · -~ 
~a:N' / s;,NDS 
, ::::. sse::-:.. .,.. ...... --·· ~...

-......... ~J ... _ 

J 

()EF'ERRED COMPENSATION 
C) 
The Union seeks a ..Section'r..a•457•··'de·ferred · compensation pl an, f uncied. by ,.,·voluntary•..-... comtributions··,.· of'"' bargaining·· unit 

This is a -no-cost ·item··that· the· City., has already 
granted to at 1east one other major bargaining unit, We therefore find it appropriate, and we so AWARD The City shall ,prov~~ection 457 deferred 
com'l"'mcion plon foe(~\' p,csonn<\' 
\ concur. ~~ ~ 
~ di ssen'=.. ( J·a:-~ E.I S1'.NDS RIGiA.ll.D ?LA.l<lAV S:..'Y 
..
I concur.
) 

.,.. 
---, 

CQQRT TIME 
On this subject, our executive conference established that the City's principal concern is a i:otential abuse that the Union does not seek, The City fears that the Union can use existing contract language to generate court Time payments by subpoenaing its own members in proceedings for the Union's interest. Because the parties a·gree on this qualification to their contract's language we so 
AWARD 
Article 2,8 oi the parf.iJ'.s' collective bargaining agreement shall be amended to add/this sentence: "Court Time shall not be paid to an o rce0ubpoenaed ~eUnion in a 
5roceecing for the Onion · t.'erest. • 
() 

'\ . 
I concur. SANDS 
! di sse~t.
:) 

I CO :'l. C i.: :' • 

... 
I 
i 
I 

i.£EP 1 9 1989 
Fj 



VACATIONS 
(7 
0 A majority of us find no reason to delete the "second tier" of benefits for employees hired on and after July 1, 1984. In 1984 the Union bargained that ooncession to support additional 
a 
benefits still being received. 
Nor are we convinced· that the Union's demand is 
0 
appropriate for "sell-back" of up to three weeks' vacation time at either pre.'11iurn or straight-time rates. vacation time· .is necessary for effective stress management, and the City has not 
0 
expressed a need for the additional staffing this would pr?vide. 
There is, however, a real issue of fairness presented by t.'le Union's re::.aining Vacation demand. Under present contract 
lani;uase t..1-ie Co~~issione: arc.ay" allow caz.:=yovers of vacation time 
r.iissed by e:.--:.?loyees in instances of (a) recuest or order by the 

"proviCe a~t ;;-.a:.:::.c.i:i aC.esuate service 't.O ~~e pu:::J.ic, n an!: (:l) 

vacatio:1 er..title::e:it a~d :.~at, as to those =we ir.s-:.a:i.ces, ca:ry­




M'MP 

1. The third sentence of~t.i::J.,e,.4-;4-'t,f the parties collective bargaining agreement shall be amended to read, "The Cornrnissioner shall allow vacation carryover in the first two specific instances which follow and may allow it in the third:" 
0 
2. Subparagraphs {B) and {Cl of Article 4 .4 shall be exchanged so that present (Cl becomes the second specificinstance and 
present (B) becomes t,Vthird. . 


() ·~· 
I concur. ~ JOH_:_)! SANDS I dissent.
0 
RICHARD PLANAV SJr:l 
I concu:. 
ROBERT P. MEEGAN 
.,.. 

14 
SEP 1 9 1989 
UNIPQfil! ALLQi'NJCE
(} 
Current practice pays $380 per year to officers for replacement and maintenance of uniforms and equipnent costing far l!lore than that. The ..i:;_ity·Council 1 s· Commission•'On-·•Police..,·salarie-s 
0 
made special mention of the current uniform allowance's inade­qua cy. The City's objection to incurring the cost of additional uniform allowance payments is that nothing guarantees officers 
0 
will use those payments for the intended purpose, 
Both parties' concerns can be met by changing entirely the nature of the uniform benefit. We shall require thi= City 
' 
he:eaiter to provide all mandated original and replacement items 
') ) f uniform and equip,11ent. The City shall make annual payments to officers cf. $100 to be used exclusively for maintenance and 
cleaning to required stanciards of uniforms and equi:;:rnent required 
by t...~e C-i-v .z,_.,a ;; e so
--... 

.,.. 
l :::.:£cc:::.~,,e 0:1 t.he Ca~e cf -:._--:is A.;a:d, A::ticle X!X o:: t:..e :;:.c. =~:.es 1 co:!':.: a c-= s:l all be 2...7~ e!'lCe d to : ea C, 
-) 
.. ) 
15 
SEP 1 9 198! 
CJ 
"; 
NJ.. 2 
JJNIFORKS AND EQUIPMENT 

19 .1  orici oal  and  Replacement  Items  
O  Effective~septem!:>e"'i:"'"'s'~'"'-"f91ff'""at its own· expense the City shall provide bargaining unit personnel with all mandate.d items of original and replacement items of uniform and equipnent. For present members of the Department this provision shall apply prospectively for replacement items of currently-owned uniforms and equipnent.  
19 .2  Mei ntenance  and  Cleaning  
0  .)  Effective September S, 1989 the City sh'all make annual pay;;-,e:1r.s of ·$100 to all bar~ning unit employees to be used exclusively for maintenance,.and cleaning to required1Hendacds of th• City.  
.  I I  conci.::. cisse::r..  ~~ (YE. S)'_l-!DS  
RIC3ARD  ?LAN.:0.VSKY  
'.)  
 
....  


J 

1SEP 1 9 1989 
GRIEVANCE PROCEDORE 
The City seeks a number of amendments to the grievance procedure that it intends to facilitate efficient processing of grievances, After extensive discussion by the Panel, mediation by the Chairman, and compromise by the partisan Members, we unanimously direct that the.Grievance Procedure be amended in the fo.J,lowing respects to accomplish that purpose; and we so 

1. -Article XI 'of the parties' collective bargaining
() 
agre=.ent shall be amended in the following respects: 
(a) Step 1 shall read, 
T::e employee and/or the Union shall
(_) ) 
grievance o:-ally to the e.-r,ployee' s direct line 
hclc:L,:; t:ie rank of not lower than captain (or 
Ca~::ain's designee when the captain is not on 
twenty (20) calendar days • • • • [Continue as 
:) ­
(::,) Ste::: 2 's first sentence s::a!l read, 
. 
J.! a 
~.-i::.'l.in .:wo 
grie. ance, 
s=i;va;;ce e::;::c:·e: 1 s 
l ~·e-..... __ 
.._,,.,., -...... C:. .. .t 
Ins?-c-:.o~'s C:.:-:.y), w~o 

C=·•c::
-.: -· 
submit the superior to the 
duty) within in original. J 
sa':!s!ac~o:y settleuent or dis?Osition is nbt made 
(2) cavs after the oral. si::::r:iission of me 
~~e E::.';;loyee and/or t..ie Union~ay submi~ t..'rie in ,,::-i-::ing.wit..~in ten (10) days tne:ea::-:.e: to the 
c:.i:ec-:. li:ie scpervisor holding a :'ar.k o:f not 
,-,;.. ;cc<~,.. Tns-cto'" (0'" -o -;,e D'"' c,; on 
~-y -----'• -• ~ ;,. ., ., "'" ""'-.;. T ---• 
Cesi;~ee wte~ the Division I~s?e,ctor is not on .s:1all a::s-"'·e= s~..me in 1,;z-iting "'·i-:.!:ii:i te:i (10) 


") ' ... 
,,._, .J.. ( .. 

(c) In Step,;i3Ta;. first sentence, thre""fiV-e~-Si"'ffart±·me"l7 fmi-t sh11.1-1-•be-changetl-to·-i!'l!n=t'l-O·)<"'da':f'S. 
() 
(d) ~Step•-··4 L-s first sentence shall be amended to read, 
If not satisfied with the Collllllissioner of Police's answer, the Union may, within ten (10) days after receipt thereof, submit the grievance to arbitration..-by one of the following panel of Arbitrators, who shall receive cases in the following alphabetical order of rotation: 
Elizabeth B. Croft 
l:loward Foster Paul Klein 
Wade J. Newhouse 
David Randles 
Eli I. Taub 
In all other resoects Public Employment Relations Board procedures shall 0 govern the arbitration proceeding. 
(e) 1-:rticle 11.2 (!) shall Ca.mended to change the
?'\

) 'r.ay, • to md, "sn'11." ~ 
! co~c:.::. 
I Ci sse:::. .. 



..ll.BlJ 
We unanimously agree that the t:errn~f,.,;;.,:the"'"contract<·~. imFQ se d ;'"by·' th i s"""'Aw ard .. should be the Taylor Law I s t.wo-year­rnaxirnum, and we so 
AWARD 
The term of the parties' collective bargaining agreement shall be two years, ir July 1, 1988 to June 30, 1990. 
j, 
I concur. 
SANDS 

I co:-icu:. 

RICl:!A?.D PLA."'11'.VSKY 
J• )i 
cone:.::. 


I 1 
· I1 
20 

(J AFFTRHJ\TTON 
Pursuant to Article 75 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules a majority of us affirm the foregoing as our Interest Arbitration Award in ·the above matter and tP.at at least a majority of us has concurred in each item of thi Award. 
0 
Dated: South Orange, NJ 
September 5, 1989 
0 

· Dated: Buffalo, NY September 5, 1989  RICHARD PLANAVSKY  
Datec: Buffalo, NY Sefteraber 5, 1989  ROBERT  P. MEEGAN  


..... 

C) 
IX. 
1986 -1988 


'.) 




AGREEMENT 
between 
THE CITY OF BUFFALO, NEW YORK 
and 
BUFFALO POLICE BENEVOLENT AssocIATION INCORPORATED 

July 1, 1986 -June 30, 1988 
, r i 
AGREEMENT BETWEEN CITY OF BUFFALO, NEW YORK 
0 
and BUFFALO POLICE BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION Incorporated 
July I, 1986-June 30, 1988 
0 

CJ 
I ) 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Tille Page 
Wilnesselh ........... , , ............... , . , , .............. , . , ............ I ARTICLE I RECOGNITION .................................... 2-3 
I. I Exclusivity ............ , . ,.... ,......... ,..... ,.... , . 2 
1.2 Dues and Fees ..... , , . , .. , ..... , ....... , .. , .......... 2 
1.3 Agency Shop ............................. , ........ 2-3 
l.4 Disaffirmancc of Righi to Strike . , ........ ,...............3 
1.5 
City Service Defined ................. ,.... , ........... 3 ARTICLE II SALARIES AND HOURS OF WORK .................. 4-9 

2.1 
Salary ... , ......... , , ..... , ........ , ............... , .4 


2.2 Hours of Work ........ , ............ , , .... , ......... 4-5 
2.3 Employee Notification .. , .. ,.................... , , .....5 
2.4 Reporting Time ...................... ,..............5-6 
2.5 Overtime Compensation ............................... 6 
2.6 Overtime Procedure ... , ............................. 6-7 
2.7 Preferred Overtime .... , ... , . , ..... , , , .............. , , .8 
2.8 Court Time ........... , .. , , , ........ , ........ , . , .....8 
2.9 Departmental conference , .............. ,.... , ........ 8-9 
2.10 Pay Increments ...... , .. , ........................... , .9 
2.11 Night Shift Differential .......... ,... , .............. , , . 9 ARTICLE III HOLIDAYS ... ,, ................................... 10 
3.I Holidays Recognized and Observed .. , .................. lO 
3.2 
Holiday Pay ........... , ........... , .. , ......... , ... 10 ARTICLEIV VACATIONS .................................... 11-13 

4.1 
Eligibilily and Allowance ... , , .... , , ................. , 11 


4.2 Non-cumulative ........ , .. , . , .................. , , . , . 11 
4.3 Prorated ................. , .............. , , .. , . . . . . . 11 
4.4 Carryovers ... , , ..... , ........... , . , .. , , ............ 12 
4.5 Scheduled Changes ........ , , .... , ....... , , , ..... , . . . 12 
4.6 Weekly-Vacation (W-V) Days ......... , . ,.... , ........ 12 
4.7 Monetary Equivalent .......................... ,...... 12 
4.8 Vacation Anniversary Date .. , ......................... 12 
4.9 Retroactive Vacation Entillemcnl ............... , . , , , ... 13 
Prorating Chari .... , .................. , , ... , .........13 ARTICLEV SICK LEAVE BENEFITS .......................... 14-15 ARTICLE VI PERSONAL LEAVE .......... ,,., ................. , .16 
6.1 Entitlement .. , . , ................. ,..................16 
6.2 Personal Leave Date , ............... , ........ ,........16 ARTICLE VII BEREAVEMENT LEAVE ............................ 17 ARTICLE VIII LEAVES OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY ................ 18 
8.1 General ................. ,..........................18 
8.2 Union Business .............. , .... , ... , ............. 18 
8.3 Maternity ........................... , , ............. I 8 
8.4 
AWOL .......... , ................. ,............. , . 18 · ARTICLE IX RETIREMENT BENEFITS ............................19 

9.1 
20-Year Retirement Plan (Section 384-d) .............. , .. 19 


9.2 Career Retirement Plan (Section 375-i) ,............ ,..... 19 
ARTICLEX SENIORITY ................................ ,....20-21 JO.I Definition ... , . , ....................................20 
10.2 Vacations and Personal Leave Days .....................21 
10.3 Officers .......................... , , .. , . , ...........21 
) 
TABLE OF CONTENTS CONT'D 

Tille 
10.4 
ARTICLE XI 
II.I 
11.2 ARTICLE XII 12.10 12.2 12.3 
ARTICLE XIII 
13.1 
C) ARTICLE XIV 
ARTICLE XV 
ARTICLE XVI 
ARTICLE XVII 
ARTICLE XVIII 
ARTICLE XIX 
19.1 

19.2 
ARTICLE XX 
ARTICLE XX! 
21.1 
21.2 21.3 21.4 21.5 21.6 ARTICLE XX!! 22.l 22.2 22.3 22.4 22.5 ARTICLEXXIIJ ARTICLE XXTV ARTICLEXXV ARTICLE XXVI ARTICLE XXVII ARTICLE XXVJII ART-ICLE,XXIX ARTICLEXXX APPENDIX A APPEND!XB APPENDIXC APPENDIXD 
Page 
Detective Scrgcanl, Detective and Acting Detective .................................. 21 SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES ......................22-23 Grievance and Arbitration Procedures ....................22 Matters Relevant to Grievance Procedure .............. 22-23 DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGE .. , ..... , , ..........24-26 Disciplinary Action .................................. 24 Procedure ................ , , ......... , ........... 24-25 Suspension Pending Determination ofCharges: Penalties ........................... 25-26 UNION ACTIVITIES ON CITY'S TIME AND PREMISES ................................. 27 Representatives ................... , ............. , ....27 PLEDGE AGAINST DISCRIMINATION AND COERCION .................................28 MAINTENANCE OF BENEFITS .......................29 JOINT HEALTH AND SAFETY COMMITTEE ...........30 TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENT ........................ 31 TRANSFERS ................... , ............. , .....32 UNIFORM ALLOWANCE ......... , ..................33 Allowance ......................................... 33 Equipment ......................... , ............... 33 GROUP LIFE INSURANCE ...........................34 HEALTH AND DENTAL CARE COVERAGE ...... , ..35-37 Blue Cross and Blue Shield ..................... , , ..... 35 Medical Insurance Upon Retirement .....................35 Dental Program .................................. , , . 36 Notification of Status ....................... , .........36 Payment In Lieu oflnsurance Coverage ................36-37 Alternate Insurance Coverage ....... , .................. 37 POLICEMEN'S BILL OF RIGHTS .. , , ......... , .....38-39 Purpose ..... , ............ , ................ , ........38 Informing the Member ..... , ..........................38 Conduct ofInvestigation .. , .........................38-39 Minor Violations ............. , ...................... 39 Disciplinary Action ...................................39 LONGEVITY ....................................40-41 TENURE .......................................... 42 PRINTING OF CONTRACT .......................... 43 TERMINATION ............................... , .... 44 GENERAL PROVISIONS ............................ 45 MANAGEMENT RIGHTS ............................46 PQLICE DEf'AR'.fMENT VEHICLES ...................47 CIVIL INDEMNIFICATION .......................... 48 SALARY SCHEDULE "A" ............. , .. , , ..........50 SALARY SCHEDULE "B" ...... , .... , ..... , . , ........51 SALARY SCHEDULE "C" ............................52 SALARY SCHEDULE "D" ........................... .53 
ii 
AGREEMENT 
THIS AGREEMENT, entered into this 30'" day of December, 1987 by and between the CITY OF BUFFALO, NEW YORK, a municipal corporation, 
E) hereinafter called the "City" and BUFFALO POLICE BENEVOLENT ASSOCIATION, hereinafter called the Union 
WITNESSETH: WHEREAS, it is the public policy of the City to promote harmonious and
() 
cooperative relationships between the City and its employees; and 
WHEREAS, it is the further policy of the City to protect the public by assuring at all times the orderly and uninterrupted operations and functions of its 
government, and 
WHEREAS, these policies are best effectuated by 
(a) 
Granting to its public employees the right of organization and representation; and 

(b) 
Requiring the City to negotiate with and enter into written agreements with Unions representing public employees which have been certified or recognized; and 


WHEREAS, the City has recognized the Union for the purpose of negotiating collectively in the determination of, and administration of, grievances arising under the terms and conditions of employment and also for negotiating and entering into a written agreement with the said Union to determine such terms and conditions of employment; and 
WHEREAS, the parties hereto have negotiated in good faith with respect to compensation and other terms and conditions of employment; and 
WHEREAS, the parties following extended and deliberate negotiations have reached certain understandings and desire to embody them in a formal agreement, which the Common Council of the City has authorized the Mayor to execute pursuant to Common Council Proceeding Item No, 74 of October 27, 1987, 
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the following mutual covenants, it is hereby agreed as follows: 
.. )_ 
ARTICLE I 

RECOGNITION 
I. I Exclusivity 
The City hereby recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive negotiating agent for all of the employees whose job titles appear on Schedules "A" through "D", annexed for the purpose of establishing compensi1tion and other tem1s and conditions of employment for the life of this Agreement.
() 
1.2 Dues and Fees 
The City shall deduct membership initiation fees from the wages of those employees who have filed with the Comptroller an appropriate written authorization to do so and shall remit the same to the Union. The City shall also deduct Union dues every two (2) weeks from the wages of those employees who have filed with the Comptroller an appropriate written authorization and shall remit the same to the Union. The necessary authorization forms shall be provided by the Union. The amount to be deducted from each employee's wage shall be certified to the Comptroller by the Secretary-Treasurer of the Union. 

1.3 Agency Shop 
(A) 
Any present or future employee represented by the Buffalo Police Benevolent Association, Inc., who is not a Union member and who does not make application for membership, shall have deducted from their wage or salary the amount equivalent to the dues levied by such employee organization. The Comptroller shall-make such deductions and transmit the sum so deducted to such employee organization, provided however the employee organization has established and maintained a procedure providing for the refund to any employee demanding the return of any part of an agency shop fee deduction which represents the employee's pro rata share of expenditures by the organization in aid of activities or causes only incidentally related to terms and conditions of employment. 

(B) 
For the purpose of this Agreement, the term "Employee" shall mean, unless otherwise specified, only permanent, probationary, or provisional personnel, or those who have been in City service on a full-time basis for (6) consecutive months or more. 

(C) 
The employee organization shall indemnify and hold harmless the City of Buffalo and its officials or employees from any cause of action, claim, loss, or damages incurred as a result of the Employer's deduction of an agency fee from any employee. The employee organization shall have no right or interest in any agency fee deduction until such collected monies are actually paid 


2 

lo the employee organization. Upon the forwarding by mail of payment of the agency fee deduction to the last known address of the employee organization, the City of Buffalo and its officer and employees shall be relieved from all liabilities to deduct such fees and deliver such deductions lo the employee organization. 

1.4 Disaffirmance of Rie:ht to Strike 
The Union affirms that it does and will not assert the right to strike or to engage in other concerted stoppage of work or slow-down by its members against the City nor to assist or participate in any such acts nor to counsel, advise, urge or
() 
impose upon its members an obligation to conduct, assist, or participate in such a strike, or other acts as herein defined. 
In the event that the Union or any of its members shall violate any of the provisions of this Section, the Union or its said members shall be subject to all the penalties imposed by law. 

1.5 City Service Defined 
For the purposes of this Agreement, the term 'City service' shall include service with the Buffalo Board of Education, Buffalo Housing Authority, Buffalo 
'.) Sewer Authority, and any City of Buffalo department or division whose job title is found in the approved City salary ordinances. Service with any other employer will not be considered City service. 
If an employee is hired by the Buffalo Police Department in a position represented by the Union and has immediate service or a break in service of one 

(I) year or less from the above-referenced agencies, the employee's vacation and personal leave entitlements shall be based on their original date of hire in these agencies, with appropriate adjustments made for any breaks in service. Personal leave utilized in the previous twelve (12) month period shall be deducted from the member's entitlement in the first year of hire in the Police Department. Appointments at other than the first salary increment step shall be made only with the approval of the Commissioner of Police and Director of Labor Relations, and shall not be subject to the grievance procedures outlined in this Agreement. 
ff the employee's hiring by the Buffalo Police Department is preceded by a break in service of more than one (l) year, he shall be treated as a new employee. Prior City service will count for vacation purposes only. 
3 

ARTICLE II 
SALARIES AND HOURS OF WORK 
2.1 Salary 
(A) 
Retroactive to July I, I986, each employee shall receive a salary increase of$ I00, as reflected in Salary Schedule "A". 

(B) 
Retroactive to July 1, 1986, each employee shall receive a salary increase of four (4) percent and each employee holding the rank of Police Officer shall receive an additional salary increase of $ 100, as reflected in Salary Schedule "A". 

C) 
Retroactive to January I, 1987, each employee shall receive a one (I) percent salary increase, as reflected in Salary Schedule "B". 

(D) 
Retroactive to July I, 1987. each employee shall receive a five (5) percent salary increase and each employee holding the rank of Police Officer shall receive an additional salary increase of $100, as reflected in Salary Schedule "C". 

(E) 
Effective January l, 1988, each employee shall receive a one (l) percent salary increase, as reflected in Salary Schedule "D". 

(F) 
The City shall pay all salaries and wages upon a biweekly basis. In the event that the regularly scheduled day of payment is a holiday, payment shall be made upon the day preceding. 



2.2 Hours of Work 
(A) 
The regular hours of daily work shall be consecutive except for interruptions for lunch periods. 

(8) 
All employees shall be scheduled to work a regular work shift as determined by the Commissioner of Police, which work shift shall have a regular starting and quitting time. The present platoon system shall remain the same and t:he hours are: 


) 0730 hours to 1530 hours 1530 hours to 2330 hours 2330 hours to 0730 hours 
l) 
All shifts not listed above shall remain the same. 
Except for emergency situations, as declared by the Commissioner of Police as outlined in 2.2(0), work shift schedules shall not be changed by the Commissioner of Police unless the changes are mutually agreed upon. Work shift schedules shall not be changed as a disciplinary measure, or for the purpose of depriving any employee of a benefit to which he would otherwise be entitled. 
4 
(C) The City shall maintain and make available to all its employees a 
daily record showing the time worked by each employee. 

(D) Whenever public demands require the Commissioner of Police t6 suspend any vacation or any W-V day or to increase any tour of duty, all 
employees affected thereby shall be paid for such suspended vacation and/or leave, or increased tour of duty at the rate of time and one-half ( I 1/2). 


2.3 Employee Notification 
It shall be the responsibility of an employee to keep the employer informed of his current address and telephone number, where he can be notified of emergencies. In disciplinary action, the City shall notify the PBA if the employee cannot be reached. 
All notices of change of address and/or telephone numbers to the Commissioner of Police shall be filed within ten ( 10) days of the effective day of the change. 
Except as otherwise provided, each employee is required to report all unscheduled absences from work to a telephone number designated by the Police Department no later than the beginning of the employee's regularly assigned starting time. An employee failing to report an absence shall be deemed to be absent without leave. An employee who reports for work within one (I) hour of the regularly assigned starting time shall not be considered absent without leave. Such employee shall be considered tardy. 
Unreported absences and tardiness may result in disciplinary action. 

2.4 Reporting Time 
The fifteen ( 15) minute period prior to the commencement of a tour of duty required by police regulations shall be compensated at time and one-half (I 1/2) and such period shall neither be reduced nor eliminated. To be entitled to such payment, an employee must have actually reported for duty. 
The twenty-five (25) minute period subsequent to the conclusion of a tour of duty shall be compensated at time and one-half ( 1 I /2), and such period shall 
) neither be reduced nor eliminated. Employees shall not be required to remain on duty upon the completion of the regular duty hours as stated in Article 2.2(B ), except in those circumstances when it is necessary for an employee to complete a task begun in the course of regular duty hours. To be entitled to such payment, an employee must have actually reported for duty. 
Employees injured in the line of duty will continue to receive forty (40) 
minutes of reporting time per day to be paid at the rate of time and one-half 
(I 1/2). 
5 

) 
) 
Whenever an employee, who is properly relieved by his superior, terminates his tour of duty without completing a full eight (8) hours, said employee shall receive forty (40) minutes of reporting time to be paid at the rate of time and one-half (I 1/2) 

2.5 Overtime Compensation 
Whenever any employee represented by the Union is required to remain on duty or report for duty in excess of a regular work shift, such employee shall be compensated al the rate of time and one-half ( I 1/2) for the time worked in excess of the regular work shift. 
Overtime shall consist of all work performed in excess of eight (8) hours in any tour of duty, or in excess of the regularly scheduled work week of forty (4) hours per week. Overtime shall be earned in multiples of fifteen (15) minute periods and shall begin after the twenty-five {25) minute period immediately following a tour of duty. 

2.6 Overtime Procedure 
In the event the Commissioner of Police determines ove1time is required, the opportunity to work overtime shall be offered as follows: 
(A) 
The senior off-duty Police Officer assigned to the platoon/unit in which the manpower shortage occurs, shall be offered the opportunity to work overtime. 1f that off-duty Police Officer declines to accept the overtime the opportunity to work the overtime shall be given to the next most senior off-duty Police Officer within the platoon/unit. Said opportunity shall likewise peas through the platoon/unit based on seniority. 

(B) 
In the event no Police Officer, who is assigned to the platoon/unit in which the manpower shortage occurs, accepts the overtime, then the opportunity to work overtime shall be offered to the most senior off-duty Police Officer assigned to the precinct/bureau in which the manpower shortage occurs, and said opportunity shall likewise pass through the precinct/bureau based on seniority. 

(C) 
ff no Police Officer who is assigned to the platoon/unit -precinct/ bureau in which the manpower shortage occurs accepts the overtime, then the most junior Police Officer assigned to that precinct/bureau will be assigned to fill the vacancy. In instances of emergency, and upon approval of the commanding officer, the junior Officer may obtain a replacement to fill the vacancy. 


(El) In case of emergency, where·· a command officer cannot readily contact Police Officers pursuant to this Section, then the command officer may retain Police Officers from the platoon which is then on duty, based on seniority as contained herein. 
6 
(E) Police Officers assigned steady days off (W-V) shall be assigned to platoon W-V section, and shall be offered the opportunity to work overtime when 
0 
'.) 
) 
) 
that platoon section is on W-V. 
(F) 
The Police Officer whose absence created the manpower shortage shall not be considered to fill the vacancy, except those on regularly scheduled annual vacations of one {I) or more weeks. Those Police Officers on single A-V days are ineligible for overtime except in emergencies. 

(G) 
For purposes of overtime, seniority shall be based upon the length of a Police Officer's service in that mnk, beginning with the date of appointment to that rank. 

(H) 
Personnel on military leave, bereavement leave, leave of absence, sick leave or maternity leave will not be considered for overtime work. 


(!) When there is a requirement to replace an absent Detective or Detective Sergeant, the most senior officer, of the rank to be replaced, and in that assignment, shall be given the first opportunity to work overtime. Said opportunity shall likewise pass through the assignment based on seniority. If the overtime is not accepted pursuant to this Section, the least senior officer within the assignment shall fill the vacancy. 
In the event department-wide general detective duty is required, selection shall be made from the general roster of Detectives beginning with the most senior Detective and progressing down the seniority list of such officers. The least Senior Detective shall fill the vacancy in those instances where overtime is declined pursuant to this Section. 
(J) 
In the event of the necessity to replace an absent Lieutenant, the most senior Lieutenant within the assignment concerned shall be given the first opportunity to work overtime. Said opportunity shall likewise pass through the assignment based on seniority. If the overtime is not accepted pursuant to this Section, the least senior officer within the assignment shall fill the vacancy. 

(K) 
An employee receiving "Preferred Overtime" shall not be considered for an overtime tour of duty until all other preceding procedures have been exhausted. 

(L) 
In the event of the necessity to replace a Captain or Inspector, the most senior officer, of the rank to be filled, shall be given the first opportunity to work overtime, and said opportunity shall likewise pass through the applicable rank based on seniority. lf'the overtime is not accepted pursuant to this Section, the least senior officer within the applicable rank shall fill the vacancy. 


7 
(J 

) 
. J 
____j 

2.7 Preferred Overtime 
Employees desiring to be placed on the Department of Police preferred overtime list, must so notify the Commissioner of Police, or his designee, in writing, six (6) months prior to the employee's requested retirement date. The lists established as a result of this notification procedure shall be in effect for the six (6) consecutive month period following the month of notification only, and shall be assembled and utilized in order of the seniority of the applicants. The preferred overtime list shall contain the names of those employees desiring to work overtime on those days they are scheduled by-the department head for approved annual or personal leave. 
All hours worked as a result of the preferred overtime list are done so while an employee is using approved annual and personal leave and shall be paid at the rate of time and one-half ( 1 1/2) of the employee's base salary hourly rate. 
An employee who has worked overtime while on annual or personal leave and who subsequently is off duty due to illness or off-duty injury more than six 
(6) days in the calendar year following his placement on the preferred overtime list, shall have deducted the number of days in excess of six (6) days from his accumulated unused vacation time which would otherwise be paid in a lump sum. Exceptions for serious illness can be made at the sole discretion of the Commissioner of Police. 
An employee may work overtime from the preferred overtime list during one (I) calendar year only. Such employee may not work more than one (I) week of preferred overtime in any calendar month. Such employee will not be eligible to work overtime while on annual or personal leave in any subsequent calendar year. 
The prnctice of paying the cash value of unused annual leave shall continue as presently in effect. 
If the preferred overtime list procedure is abused, those abuses will be corrected to the reasonable satisfaction of the City. 

2.8 Court Time 
Police Officers who are required to appear in court or before any regulatory or administrative agency for the purpose of testifying at any time other than during their own regularly scheduled work period shall be paid at their regular hourly rate for all time so spent and they shall be guaranteed at least four (4) hours ofpay at their regular·hourly-rate for such time. 

2.9 Departmental Conference 
Any member who is directed to appear at a departmental conference either 
8 

) 
by his immediate superior or by the Commissioner of Police shall be compensated for the time so spent at his regular hourly rate of pay where his appearance is required at a time other than during his own regularly scheduled work period. This provision shall not apply in the case of a member who is himself the subject of such conference or investigation. 

2.10 Pay Increments 
The following procedure will be effective through the teml of this Agreement: 
(A) 
There will be no increment steps in promotional ranks. 

(B) 
All employees appointed to the position of Police Officer on or after July I, 1980 shall have a starting salary and four (4) incremental steps. The incremental steps shall be obtained on the employee's anniversary date of hire, which date shall be adjusted for any leaves of absence, suspensions without pay, or absences without leave. An employee will reach the maximum salary in four 

(4) 
years from the (revised) date of hire. 

(C) 
Preferential rates of pay for employees formerly holding Desk Lieutenant rank shall be abolished. These employees shall receive the regular compensation paid to Police Officers. 



2.11 Night Shift Differential 
(A) 
Ia addition to the established wage rates, the City shall pay a night shift differential of $.15 per hour to all second and third shift precinct personnel. This differential shall apply for all hours worked on shifts beginning at 1530 hours to 0730 hours. 

(B) 
Pot employees not assigned to precinct duty, a night shift differential of $.15 per hour shall be paid to those employees whose tour of duty is between 1400 and 0730 hours. 


The night shift differential listed in 2.11 (A) and (B) shall not be paid for the fifteen (15) minute period prior to the commencement of a tour of duty or the twenty-five (25) minute period subsequent to the conclusion of a tour of duty. 
9 

ARTICLE III 
) 
'.) 
) 
) 
HOLIDAYS 
3.1 Holidays Recognized and Observed 
The following are recognized holidays for the purposes of this Agreement: 
New Year's Day Labor Day Dr. Martin Luther King Day Columbus Day President's Day General Election Day Good Friday Veteran's Day Memorial Day Thanksgiving Day Independence Day Christmas Day 
Dr. Martin Luther King Day shall be celebrated on the third Monday in January. President's Day shall be celebrated on Washington's Birthday. 
Whenever any of the holidays listed above shall fall on a Sunday, the succeeding Monday shall be observed as the holiday. Whenever any of the holidays listed above shall fall on a Saturday, the preceding Friday shall be observed as the holiday. 

3.2 Holiday Pay 
Beginning in December of 1987, and in recognition of the police officers' work schedule, each employee shall receive, on or before December 15 of each year, a limp sum payment which is equal to four (4) hours' pay at the straight time rate of pay for each of the above-referenced holidays. 
IO 
ARTICLEN 
VACATIONS
F) 



4.1 Eligibility and Allowance 
Each employee who shall have been in the employ of the City for at least one (I) year shall be granted a vacation in each calendar year of the following duration corresponding to his years of service: 
Years of Completed Service Vacation Allowance 
I, 2, 3,4 2 weeks 5 3 weeks 6 3 weeks I day 
'.) 7 3 weeks 2 days 8 3 weeks 3 days 9· 3 weeks 4 days 10 4 weeks 11 4 weeks I day 12 4 weeks 2 days 
'.) 13 4 weeks 3 days 14 4 weeks 4 days 15 and over 5 weeks 
Employees hired by the City on or after July I, 1984 into positions represented by the Union, shall be granted vacation entitlements according to the
) 
following schedule: 
Years of Completed Service Vacation Allowance 
1-2 I week 3-6 2 weeks 7-9 3 weeks 10-15 4 weeks 16 and over 5 weeks 

4.2 Non-cumulative 
Except as provided for under Section 4 hereof, vacations are non­cumulative and must be taken during the calendar year in which the employee became eligible for such vacation period. 

4.3 Prorated 
) 
In the event an employee does not complete a full twelve ( I 2) month year, the employee's vacation period shall be prorated in accordance with the vacation entitlement chart which appears in this Article. 
II 

'.) 
) 
4.4 Carryovers 
Vacation cairyover means carrying unused vacation entitlement from one 
(I) 
year lo the nexl consecutive year. Vacation carryover shall be limited lo a maximum of two (2) weeks. The Commissioner may allow vacation carryover in the specific instances which follow: 

(A) 
The Commissioner requesting or requiring an employee lo forego scheduled vacation in order that said department may provide and maintain adequate service lo the public 

(B) 
Any employee entitled to vacation benefits who may become ill or incapacitated prior to the taking of such vacation requesting carryover privileges; provided that such illness or accident is medically verified by the attending physician specifying the nature and date of the disability. 

(C) 
An employee being injured in the discharge of his duties. 



4.5 Scheduled Changes 
There shall be no change in any vacation schedule once the same has been posted unless the members effected by such change consent thereto. 

4.6 Weekly-Vacation /W-Vl Days 
Each employee may, at his option, use a maximum of two (2) weeks' vacation (up to ten [IO] days), one([) at a time. Additionally, he may have two 
(2) 
W-V days immediately preceding each of his vacation periods, and have two 

(2) 
W-V days immediately following his vacation period, provided the vacation period is a minimum of one (I) week or five (5) days. However, only five (5) A-V days, one (I) day at a time, can be taken in the months of June, July and August. These five (5) individual days may be taken in addition to any other scheduled summer vacation, provided they are not taken in consecutive units, except those employees who work the long and short days in the precincts may take two (2) consecutive A-V days. 



4.7 Monetary Equivalent 
Upon an employee's termination for reasons other than discharge, he or his estate shall receive a monetary equivalent of his unused annual vacation entitlement earned in the previous year. Annual vacation entitlement earned in the year of termination shall also be paid on a pro-rated basis, upon tem1ination in accordance with tire Vacation Entitlement Chan which appears in tlris• Article. 

4.8 Vacation Anniversary Date 
An employee's vacation anniversary date shall be affected by all leaves of absence or suspensions without pay. For example, an employee's date of hire is October I, 1982. If that same employee received a six (6) month leave of !)bsence, his vacation anniversary date would be adjusted according to the length of the leave. Therefore, his new anniversary date is April l, 1983. 
12 
CJ 
4.9 Retroactive Vacation Entitlement 
An employee requesting prior vacation service time with the City must
F) 
make a written request to the Division of Labor Relations within twenty-four (24) 
months of his date of hire in the Police Department. Retroactive vacation 
entitlements will be credited retroactive the immediately preceding twenty-four 
(24) months. 
VACATION ENTITLEMENT CHART 
'.) 
COMPLETED MONTHS OF SERVICE IN QUALIFYING YEAR 
Years of Service  12  11  10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  I  
2 through 4  ID  9  8  7  7  6  5  4  3  3  2  I  
5  15  14  12  11  10  9  8  6  5  4  2  I  
C)  6  16  15  13  12  11  9  8  7  5  4  3  I  
7  17  16  14  13  11  ID  8  7  6  4  3  1  
8  18  16  15  14  12  ID  9  7  6  4  3  I  
9  19  17  16  14  13  11  JO  8  6  5  3  2  
10  20  18  17  15  13  12  JO  8  7  5  3  2  
)  )  11 12  21 22  19 20  17 18  16 17  14 15  12 13  JO I I  9 9  7 7  5 6  3 4  2 2  
13  23  21  19  17  15  13  12  JO  8  6  4  2  
14  24  22  20  18  16  14  12  10  8  6  4  2  
15 or more  25  23  21  19  17  15  12  10  8  6  4  2  

: ) 
13 
F) 
'.) 
ARTICLEV 
SICK LEAVE BENEFITS 
Employees shall be granted sick leave upon the lenns and conditions set forth in Section 207-c of the General Municipal Law and Section 238 of the Charter of the City. 
Employees hired by the City on or after July 1, 1984, into positions represented by the Union, shall be granted sick leave entitlements according to the following schedule and under the following procedures: 
Employees shall be granted full pay during absences due to sickness or other physical disability, to the extent of their sick leave credit, upon the following terms and conditions: 
(A) 
Employees with less than one (I) year of service shall earn sick leave credits at the rate of eight (8) hours per calendar month of service which shall be credited on the first day of the month next following the completion of each credited month of service. 

(B) 
Employees with more than one (I) year of service shall earn sick leave credits at the rate of eleven (I I) hours per calendar month of service which shall be credited on the first day of the month next following the completion of each credited month of service. 

(C) 
A credited month of service is defined as a calendar month in which an employee has been compensated for all but three (3) or less shifts. 

(D) 
Employees shall accumulate sick leave as long as they are in the service of the City up to a maximum of two thousand four hundred (2,400) hours. 

(E) 
Accumulated sick leave credits shall be transferred with an employee from one branch of the City service to any other branch thereof. 

(F) 
The City agrees that upon retirement or death, a ny accumulated, unused sick leave, up to a limit of one thousand four hundred forty (1,440) hours can be "bought back" at a ratio of I:3 (e.g. an employee with two thousand four hundred [2,400] hours unused sick leave may use only one thousand four hundred forty [1,440] hours at a ratio of I:3). 

(G) 
Sick leave may be used in whole shifts units only. 

(H) 
I) In instances of disability due to illness which lasts three (3) shifts or less, an employee may return to duty without the written certification of a physician, provided notification is given by the employee to his Captain. 


14 
() 

:) 
u ) 
2) In instances of disability due to illness which lasts more that three (3) shifts, an employee must obtain the written certification of a physician and/or the Department surgeon before that employee may retum to duty. 
3) In instances of die ability due to nn off-duty injury or accident, the employee must obtain written certification of a physician and/or the Department surgeon before that employee may return to duty. This requirement may be waived by the Commissioner of Police or his designee. 
(I) 
It shall be the responsibility of the employee to maintain and monitor an accurate account of his current sick leave entitlements. Employees who request and receive sick leave in excess of their entitlements shall have an equal number of hours deducted in a subsequent pay period. 

(J) 
All absences due to illness are to be reported to the Commissioner of Police or his designee on or before the first day of such absence, and the Commissioner may require reasonable proofs of illness. In the event of a failure to comply with the notice requirements in this Article, the employee's absence may be considered as unauthorized leave. Abuse of sick leave privileges may be cause for disciplinary action. 

(K) 
An employee who is disabled due to illness or off-duty injury, will be permitted to return to work on light duty in lieu of using sick leave subject to determination by the Department surgeon that the employee can perform light duty. 


15 

ARTICLE vr 
PERSONAL LEA VE 


6.1 Entitlement 
Employees hired before July I, 1980, and each fiscal year thereatier. shall be entitled to seven (7) days personal leave with pay each fiscal year, which leave shall be non-cumulative. An employee requesting personal leave shall do so in writing at leant forty-eight (48) hours in advance to his commanding officer. Personal leave shall be denied if the commanding officer deems that granting such a request will seriously hamper or impede the operation of his command. In the event of a personal emergency, which makes the giving of a written notice impossible, the employee must otherwise notify his commanding officer prior to the start of his shift. Said emergency personal leave day may be granted provided sufficient documentation of the emergency is produced upon request. Such personal leave may not be taken in unit of less than one-half ( 1/2) of a working day. 
All full-time employees hired on or after July I, 1980, shall be entitled to personal leave time with pay as follows: 
(A) 
Two (2) days in their first year of employment. This personal leave entitlement must be used prior to the employee's first anniversary date. 

(B) 
Four (4) days in their second year of employment. This personal leave must be used prior to the employee's second anniversary date. 

(C) 
Seven (7) days per year in their third year and subsequent years of employment. Said employees must use this personal leave entitlement prior to their next succeeding anniversary date. 



6.2 Personal Leave Date 
An employee's personal leave date shall be affected by all leaves of absence, suspensions without pay, or absences without leave. For example, an employee's date of hire is October I, I 982. If that same employee received a six 
(6) month leave of absence, the employee's personal leave date would be adjusted according to the length of the leave, and the revised personal leave date would be April l, 1983. 
16 
() 
ARTICLE Vll 
() 
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE 
Each pennanent employee ho is absent from duty on account of a death in his immediate family shall receive his established compensation for a period commencing from the day of death. Such period shall not exceed five (5) consecutive calendar days for each such death. This bereavement leave shall be non-cumulative and non-chargeable to any other leave. The employee must attend the funeral or memorial service and shall notify the Commissioner of Police or his designated representative of his request for such leave. 
The immediate family shall include the spouse, grandparent, parent, child, grandchild, brother, sister, father-in-law, mother-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in­law, daughter-in-law, son-in-law, and any other relatives of the employee or of the employee's spouse residing in the household of the employee. Steprelatives are defined as stepparent, stepbrother, stepsister and stepchild. 

17 
(} 
ARTICLE VIII 

LEAVE OF ABSENCE WITHOUT PAY 
8.1 General 
(A) 
Whenever a leave of absence without pay is granted to an employee, the head of the department or City agency granting such leave of absence without pay shall forthwith file with the City Clerk, for Presentation to the Council, a certificate Setting forth the date on which the leave of absence begins and ends. 

(B) 
Any permanent employee who is elected or appointed to public office shall, at the discretion of the Commissioner of Police, be granted a leave of absence without pay for a period of not more than one (I) year from the effective date of his election or appointment to such public office. Such leave of absence shall be renewable for successive periods of not more than one ( I) year in the sole discretion of the Commissioner of Police. 



8.2 Union Business 
Any employee who is elected to a Union office or who is designated by the Union to do work which takes him from his employment with the City, shall, upon the written request of the Union, and the consent of the Commissioner of Police, be granted a leave of absence without pay. This leave shall not exceed two (2) years, but it shall be renewed or extended at any time upon the written request of the Union and the consent of the Commissioner of Police. Any member of the Union who is selected by the Union to participate in any other Union activity shall be granted a leave of absence at the written request of the Union and the consent of the Commissioner of Police. Such leave is not to exceed one (I) month but it shall be renewed at any time upon the written request of the Union and the consent of the Commissioner of Police. 

8.3 Maternity 
Maternity leaves, not to exceed six (6} months, shall be granted upon the request of an employee. Maternity leaves shall, upon the request of the employee, be extended or renewed for an additional period not to exceed six (6) months. 

8.4 AWOL 
Any member absent without an authorized leave for more than twenty (20) working-days· may .. have ·his employment terminated· by the··department ·head without a hearing. Such termination shall be final without recourse to the disciplinary procedures contained in the collective Agreement. Upon such termination, the City will provide the employee with all benefits which he has previously earned. The above shall also apply lo a member who fails to return from an authorized leave of absence without pay within five (5) days subsequent to the expiration of the leave of absence without pay. 
18 
C, 
ARTICLE IX 

RETIREMENT BENEFITS 


9.1 20-Year Retirement Plan (Section 384-D) 
The City has adopted the necessary resolution to provide that "final average salary" shall mean the regular compensation earned during the twelve 
12) months of actual service immediately preceding the date of retirement as provided in Section 302, subd. 9 paragraph (d) of the Retirement Security Law. 
(} 
Employees shall also be entitled to obtain credit for retirement purposes for military service during World War II as provided by statute. 
The City will make available the Twenty (20) Year Retirement Plan provided in Section 384-d of the Retirement and Social Security !-,aw which shall include the 1160th benefit, when authorized 
The City has adopted the necessary resolution to provide the Career Retirement Plan set out in Section 375-i of the Retirement ad Social Security Law (twenty [20] years 1150th fraction). 

9.2 Career Retirement Plan (Section 375-i) 
Any employee presently in a retirement plan other than the Career Retirement Plan set out in Section 375-i of the Retirement and Social Security Law (the 375-i plan), may transfer to the 375-i plan during the period from February 15 to March 15 of any calendar year. Any employee who so elects to trnnsfer to the 375-i plan shall receive a salary adjustment based upon the Employer's cost savings as a resull of such transfer. That annual salary adjustment will be equal to one-third (1/3) of the difference between the Employer's cost for coverage of said employee in the retirement plan from which he transferred and the 375-i plan. This salary adjustment shall be paid in a lump sum on December 15, commencing with the year in which the employee exercised his option and each year thereafter. The initial salary adjustment will be based upon the Employer's cost savings for a full twelve (12) month period ending on March 31 of the year in which the employee elected to transfer to 375-i. In each year thereafter, the salary adjustment will be based upon the Employer's cost savings for the full twelve (12) month period ending on March 31 of the calendar year of payment. 
19 
ARTICLEX 

SENIORITY 

I0.1 Definition 
Seniority means the length of an employee's service commencing with the date of his appointment to the rank of probationary Police Officer. 
The Department recognizes the importance of seniority in filling vacancies
0 
and shall make every effort to adhere to this policy, provided the senior applicant has the ability and qualifications to perfonn the work involved. While consultation with the Police Benevolent Association President on such matters is not mandatory, the final decision of the Department shall be subject to the grievance procedure. 
C) 
I) Whenever it is detennined that a vacancy or additional position in a precinct is to be filled from among employees already assigned to that precinct, such employees shall be entitled to bid on such vacancy or position. The vacancy or position shall be filled on the basis of seniority, provided the senior applicant has the ability and meets the qualifications as specified by the 
0 Commissioner of Police prior to the filling of the vacancy. In the event that no one in the affected precinct bids on the vacancy/position, the position shall be filled by the employee within the affected precinct with the least seniority, that has the ability and meets the qualifications as specified by the Commissioner of Police. 
2) Prior to any newly appointed Police Officers being assigned a precinct patrol vacancy or additional precinct position, the Commissioner of Police shall announce the assignments to be filled via the police teletype. Bids shall be accepted on a departmental wide basis to fill such positions, and such positions will be filled on the basis of seniority, provided the senior applicant has the ability and qualifications to perform the work involved. The bidding procedure within subsection JO.I (2) shall take place only once, prior to the assignment of any rookie class. 
3) Whenever it is determined that an employee from a designated precinct be temporarily assigned outside of said precinct, such assignment shall be made on the basis of seniority of the employees within that precinct. In those cases when such temporary assignments are not requested by any employee said temporary assignments shall be made on the basis of least seniority. However, in the event an employee does not satisfactorily perform this temporary assignment, rharemployee may n-orbe ·considere,l'for this temporary assignment in the future. 
20 
C) 

) 
I 0.2 Vacations and Personal Leave Days 
Vacations and personal leave days shall be selected on the basis of seniority. In the event that circumstance make it necessary to limit the number of employees on vacation or on personal leave at any one time, the employee with the greater seniority shall be given preference. 
10.3 Officers 
The term seniority as applied to officers in the Lieutenant rank and above shall mean the length of an employee's service in that rank commencing with the date of his permanent appointment to that rank. 

10.4 Detective Sergeant. Detective. and Acting Detective 
(A) 
Demotion upon the Abolition or Reduction of a Position · In the event of the in the details of Detective Sergeant, Detective, or Acting Detective due to budgetary or administrative reasons, demotions shall be made in the inverse order of seniority within the respective detail. 

(B) 
Appointments -All assignments to the detail of Detective Sergeant shall be made from the detail of Detective. All assignments to the detail of Detective shall be made from the detail of Acting Detective. Assignments to the details of Acting Detective, Detective, and Detective Sergeant are not subject to the provisions of 10.1 within this Article and are made at the discretion of the Commissioner of Police. 

(C) 
Continuous Service -For the purpose of this Section the original appointment of Detective Sergeant, Detective and Acting Detective shall mean the date of his first appointment to such position followed by continuous service up to the time of the abolition or reduction of the position. Any period of sixty 

(60) 
days or longer during which an employee did not serve in such position shall constitute an interruption of continuous service for the purpose of this Section. 

(D) 
No Detective or Detective Sergeant shall be assigned patrol duties, either in or out of uniform, except in emergency situations as specified in Article 2.2( D) of th is Agreement. 


21 
ARTICLE XI 

SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES 


11.1 Grievance and Arbitration Procedures 
{A) Any grievance or dispute which may arise between the parties regarding the application, meaning or interpretation of this Agreement shall be settled in the following manner: 
0 
Step I -The employee and/or the Union shall submit the grievance orally to the employee's immediate superior and the employee's Union' representative within twenty (20) calendar days of the occurrence of the facts giving rise to the grievance or notice of such facts to the employee, whichever is later. 
C) Step 2 -If a satisfactory settlement or disposition is not made within two 
(2) days after the oral submission of the grievance, the employee and/or the Union may submit the grievance in writing to his next immediate superior who shall answer same within five (5) days. If the answer is a rejection of the grievance, then the said superior shall detail his reasons therefor in writing. 
0 Step 3 -If a satisfactory settlement or disposition is not made within five 
(5) 
days from the date of the written submission of the grievance, the Union may, within ten ( l 0) days thereafter, submit the grievance with the answer of the said superior, with any reply thereto, to the Commissioner of Police. The Commissioner of Police shall schedule a meeting to be held not later than ten 

(
10) days after the date of the receipt of the grievance and any accompanying papers at his office at which time the employee and/or the Union is entitled to be present. The Commissioner of Police shall, within five (5) days thereafter. set forth in writing his answer to the grievance. 


Step 4 -If not satisfied with the Commissioner of Police's answer, the Union may, within ten (10) days after receipt thereof, request that the matter be submitted to an impartial arbitrator to be selected in accord with the Public Employment Relations Board procedures. The Arbitrator shall issue his decision within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of testimony and argument. His decision shall be final and binding upon the parties. 
(B) The failure of the Union or of an employee to take any of the action authorized by this Section within the time limited therefor, shall constitute a waiver of the right to proceed further and shall terminate the proceeding. 
lt;'.2 ·Matters-Relevantto·Grievance Procedure 
(Al The Union shall provide agreed upon grievance forms in adequate numbers. 
22 
(} 
(B) The time limits in the procedure may be extended by mutual 
agreement, in writing. 

(C) Any step of the grievance procedure may be bypassed by mutual 
agreement, in writing. 
(D) 
Neither the Commissioner of Police nor the arbitrator may consider any evidence or facts which have not been previously discussed between the parties unless otherwise agreed upon by the parties. 

(E) 
In the case of a group, policy, or organization type grievance, the grievance may be submitted directly to the Commissioner of Police by the Union. 

(F) 
For purpose of definition, days shall not include Saturday, Sunday, 


or holidays except as otherwise specified in I I. l, Step 1 of this Article. () 
(G) 
Expenses for the arbitrator's services and the proceedings shall be borne equally by the City and the Union. 

(H) 
No arbitrator functioning under prov1S1011s of the grievance procedure shall have the power to amend, modify, or delete any provision of this Agreement or render any award contrary to the laws of the State of New York. 

(I) 
The Union shall provide to the Division of Labor Relations a copy of each grievance filed at each step, at the time of submission, in accordance with this Article. However, failure to do so will not constitute a waiver of the right to proceed further. 



) 
23 
ARTICLE XII 
0 
DISCIPLINE AND DISCHARGES 
12.1 Disciplinary Action 
(A) 
A permanent employee shall not be removed or otherwise subjected to any disciplinary penalty provided in this Article except for incompetency or misconduct or for committing a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude, and then only after a hearing upon stated charges. 

(B) 
Disciplinary action or measures shall consist only of the following: Reprimand. 


C) A fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100) to be deducted from salary or wages. Suspension without pay for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days. 
Demotion in grade and title. Dismissal from the service. 

12.2 Procedure 
(A) 
A permanent employee against whom disciplinary action is proposed shall be served with a written copy of the charges preferred against him and shall have ten (10) days to answer in writing, said answer to be served upon the Commissioner of Police. A copy of the charges shall also be served upon the Union. Failure to serve a written answer within the time provided shall be deemed an admission of the charges. However, where the accused defaults in answering, he shall be permitted to show matters in mitigation of any punishment which may be imposed. 

(B) 
Within ten (10) days after the receipt of the written answer to the charges preferred, the Commissioner of Police shall conduct an informal conference upon the charges. At such conference, the accused person shall have 


) the right to be represented by the Union or by legal counsel. He may, if he desires, present witnesses in his behalf. The Commissioner of Police shall have the power to dismiss or withdraw the charges if the conference so warrants, or accept a plea of guilty. 
(C) In the event that the charges are not withdrawn or dismissed after such informal conference or if a plea of guilty has not been entered, a formal conference shall then be held upon the charges before an impartial hearing officer mutually selected by the parties. Such impartial hearing officer shall be deemed 
24 

0 
0 
) 
'.) 
to be the person designated by the Commissioner of Police for that purpose within the meaning of Section 75 of the Civil Service Law of the State of New York. If the parties are unable to agree upon a besting officer, or, if the hearing officer agreed upon is or becomes unable or unwilling to act, then the parties shall mutually apply lo the Supreme Court of the State of New York for the appointment of a hearing officer. 
(D) 
The impartial hearing officer so selected and so designated shall be vested with all the powers of the Commissioner of Police and shall make a record of such conference. His findings and recommendations shall then be referred to the Commissioner of Police for review and decision. 

(E) 
Upon the said formal hearing, the accused person shall have the right of representation by counsel and also the right to summon witnesses upon his behalf. The burden of proving the charges preferred shall be upon the person alleging same. Compliance with technical rules of evidence shall not be required. 

(F) 
The time limits in this procedure may be extended by mutual agreement in writing. 



12.3 Suspension Pending Determination of Charges: Penalties 
(A) 
Pending the hearing and determination of charges, the person against. whom such charges have been preferred may be suspended without pay for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 

(B) 
The penalty or punishment imposed shall be as set forth in 12. 1, paragraph (B) of this Article. 

(C) 
If the charges are not sustained, the accused person shall be restored to his position with full pay for any period of suspension less the amount of compensation which he may have earned in any other occupation or employment or any unemployment benefits he may have received during such period. 

(D) 
If the accused person is found guilty, a copy of the charges, his written answer thereto, a transcript of the hearing, and the final determination itself shall be filed in the office of the department or agency in which he has been employed and a copy thereof shall also be filed with the Municipal Civil Service Commission. A copy of the transcript of the hearing shall, upon the request of the accused person so found guilty, be furnished to him without charge. 

(E) 
No removal or disciplinary proceeding ·shall be commenced more than one (1) year after the occurrence of the wrong-doing complained of or its discovery, if later. However, such limitation shall not apply where the wrong­doing complained of would, if proved in a court of appropriate jurisdiction, constitute a crime. 


25 

C) 
Cl 
) 
(F) Any person believing himself aggrieved by a penalty or punishment of demotion in or dismissal from service or suspension without pay, or a fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this Article, may appeal from such determination either by an application to the Buffalo Municipal Civil Service Commission, or by an application to the Court, in accordance with the provisions of Article 78 of the Civil Practice Law and Rules. If much person elects to appeal to the Commission, he shall file such appeal with the Commission in writing, within twenty (20) days after receiving written notice of the determination to be reviewed. The decision of the Commission shall be final and conclusive and not subject to Further review in any Court. 
26 
ARTICLEXI11 
0 
UNION ACTIVITIES ON CITY'S TIME AND PREMISES 
I3. l Representatives 
(A) The City agrees that during working hours, on or off its premises, and without loss of pay, accredited Union representatives shall be allowed to: Investigate and process grievances Post Union notices 
Distribute Union literature Solicit Union membership during other employees' non-working time 
Attend negotiating meetings 
Transmit communications, authorized by the local Union or its officer, to the City or its representative Consult with the City, its representatives, local Union officers, or 
other Union representatives concerning the enforcement of any provisions of this Agreement. 
) 
(B) The present practice of granting released time to accredited Union representatives for Union business shall be continued. 
/) 
j 
27 
() 
) 
i j 
' 
!) 
'') 
ARTICLE XIV 
PLEDGE AGAINST DISCRIMlNATION AND COERCION 
(A) 
The provisions of this Agreement shall be applied equally to all employees in the bargaining unit without discrimination as to age, sex, marital status, race, color. creed, national origin or political affiliation. The Union shall share equttlly with the City the responsibility for applying this provision of the Agreement. 

(B) 
Work rules shall be reasonable and shall be applied or enforced in a fair and equitable manner. 

(C) 
All references lo employees in this Agreement designate both sexes, and wherever the male gender is used, it shall be construed lo include male and female employees. 

(D) 
The City agrees not to interfere with the rights of employees as stated in Section 209a of the Civil Service Law. 


28 
ARTICLE XV 

MAINTENANCE OF BENEFITS All conditions or provisions beneficial to employees now in effect which 
are not specifically provided for in this Agreement or which have not been replaced by provisions of this Agreement shall remain in effect for the duration of this Agreement, unless mutually agreed otherwise between the City and the 
Union. () 
C) 
'.) 
29 
0 
I) 
() 
. l 
) 
ARTICLE XVI JOINT HEAL TH AND SAFETY COMMITTEE A committee of four (4) members, two (2) members designated by the Commissioner of Police and two (2) members designated by the Union, will review and investigate complaints regarding working conditions or work 
requirements. This committee will make recommendations to the City for improvements. The City will advise the committee of its decision or recommendations 
concerning these mailers. If the City rejects the committee's recommendations, it will advise the committee the reason for its rejection. The joint Health and Safety Committee will meet every three (3) months . 
30 
(} 
ARTICLE XVII TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENT 

Whenever an employee is temporarily assigned to perform the duties of a higher rank, grade, classification, or detail assignment, he shall be paid a wage rate at the increment level of the person whom he is replacing, or, if not replacing anyone, at the top of the rank. grade, classification or detail assignment. Preference for such temporary assignments shall be based on seniority as defined in Article X. 
31 
ARTICLE XVIII 
TRANSFERS
() 
(} When any member of the Department is 1rnnsferred, he shall be entitled, upon his request, to have the reason therefor stated in writing and with particularity, which statement shall become a part of his personnel file. The phrase "for the good or the service" shall not constitute an adequate or sufficient reason for transfer. 
32 

ARTICLE XIX 
UNIFORM ALLOWANCE 
19.1 Allowance 
Effective September 15, 1986, the City shall pay an annual uniform allowance of Three Hundred and Eighty Dollars ($380) in two (2) equal payments of One Hundred Ninety Dollars ($198) each. Such payment will be made on or before September 15 and May 15 respectively of each fiscal year. Employees will be eligible to collect clothing allowance if they are on the active payroll on September 15 and May 15. The employee shall be responsible for the maintenance and replacement of al items of clothing. 

19.2 Eguipment 
The City shall be responsible for furnishing the following items of equipment: 
( I)  Helmets  
(2)  Badges  
(3)  Night Sticks  

and any other new equipment deemed by the commissioner to be job related. 
33 
ARTICLE XX 
GROUP LIFE INSURANCE 
The City will continue to provide a group life insurance plan for all members covered by this Agreement which contains the following provisions: 
(A) 
A five thousand dollar ($5,000) payment upon the death of the insured; 

(B) 
An additional five thousand dollar ($5,000) payment if the cause of death is accidental; 

(C) 
A maximum payment of five thousand dollars ($5,000) for limb 


0 
dismemberment according to a schedule of payments in the current policy 0 providing this coverage; 
(D) 
A two thousand dollar ($2,000) payment upon the death of the current spouse; 

(E) 
A one thousand dollar ($1,000) payment upon the death of each dependent child from age seven (7) days to nineteen ( 19) years; 

(F) 
A waiver of premium and conversion privilege. 


) 
) 
l ) 
34 
ARTICLEXXl 

HEALTH AND DENTAL CARE COVERAGE 
21.1 Blue Cross and Blue Shield 
The City will provide hospital and medical coverage for all employees under the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan generally known as 82-83 at no cost to the employee. 
() 
The City will provide for all employees the following Blue Cross/Blue Shield benefit riders at no cost to the employees: 
MMER -$1,000,000 MMER -82-83 (deductible $50.00) Rider 8 Prescription Drug Rider as provided below Rider 8 Blue Cross Rider 8 Dependents to age 23 Blue Shield Rider 4 Emergency O.P. EKG 82-83 Blue Shield Rider 8 Dependents to age 23 82-83 
The City will provide the Blue Cross prescnpllon drug $3.00 co-pay prescription plan for all employees at no cost to the employees. 

21.2 Medical Insurance Upon Retirement 
Employees who retire during the life of this Agreement, or until a successor Agreement is executed by the Mayor or imposed by interest arbitration, shall be entitled lo receive, until their death, medical insurance benefits without cost as listed below: 
BC/BS basic plan (generally known as 62-83 $3.00 drug prescription card (carrier identical to provider of current employee plan) 
I ) 
These benefits are guaranteed only to those employees who retire during this period. This language shall be incorporated into a separate Agreement with each employee who retires in the period described above. 
The City and Union mutually agree to publish a comprehensive handbook for employees represented by the Union, covering all current benefits and benefit upon retirement. 
35 




21.3 Dental Pro11:ram 
All employees represented by the Union shall be provided the Group Health incorporated Dental Plan known as Type M-1 together with the appropriate rider providing !00% of schedule, for basic, prosthetics and orthodontia; fluoride treatments (8); dependent students covered to age twenty­five (25) for all benefits except orthodontia which is to age nineteen ( 19); with no deductible amount, at no cost to the employee. 
The Union agrees the City may seek bids for alternate dental coverage. All bid specifications will be submitted to the Union for its approval prior to publication. Upon receipt of the bids and notice to the Union, the City may select alternate dental coverage, subject to the Union's further prior approval of such dental coverage. 

21.4 Notification of Status 
Each employee must notify the Division of Labor Relations of any changes in marital and/or dependent status within ten (10) days of the effective date of the change. 

21.5 Payment in Lieu of Insurance Coverage 
(A) Any employee, represented by the Union, entitled to Blue Cross/Blue Shield family coverage as provided above may elect to waive such coverage if his spouse has Blue Cross/Blue Shield coverage. Employees waiving coverage may be required to show proof of spouse's coverage to the City and to the Union. An employee who desires to waive such Blue Cross/Blue Shield coverage shall notify the City and the Union, in writing, and such waiver of coverage shall be effective on the first day of the month following thirty (30) days after the date of receipt of such notification to the City. Those employees choosing to waive coverage shall have their written request placed in their personnel file. All employees waiving coverage will receive the sum of forty dollars ($40) per month to be paid by sepamte check, on September 30 and March 30 of each year. 
Should the spouse's coverage be terminated for any reason, the employee will immediately notify the City. Upon such notification, the City shall transfer the employee to the Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan provided herein, and the employee will be provided full family coverage without any preconditions or lapse in coverage. 
An employee who has waived his or her Blue Cross/Blue Shield coverage 
· and-who· desires··to··be-reinstated-to-such-··B-lue-eross/B-1ue··Shield-coverage·as provided in Section 21.5 shall notify the City and the Union, in writing. Such coverage shall be reinstated on the first day of the month following thirty (30) days after the date of receipt of snch notification by the City. 
36 
(B) Effective January I, 1955. the City will not provide medical or 
hospital insurance coverage. regardless of the type of plan, for any employee or8 retiree whose spouse has comparable or superior coverage as the result of 
employment in, or retirement from, City service as defined in Article 1.5. Said 
0 employee or retiree, however, shall receive four hundred and eighty dollars ($480) per year, (forty dollars ($40] per credited month) payable on or before June 30 of each year as payment in lieu thereof. 
(C) Any employee represented by the Union who is entitled to dental insurance coverage may elect lo waive such coverage. An employee who desires 
0 
to waive such coverage shall notify the City and Union in writing, and such waiver of coverage shall be effective on the first day of the month following thirty (30) days after the data of receipt of such notification to the City. All employees waiving coverage will receive the smn of twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) per month (up to one hundred fifty dollars [$150] per year), to be paid by separate check on December 15 of each year. 
An employee who has waived his or her dental insurance coverage and who desires to be reinstated to such dental insurance coverage as provided in Section 21.5 shall notify the City and Union, in writing. Such coverage shall be reinstated on the first day of the month following thirty (30) days after the date of receipt of such notification by the City. 
(D) Effective January I, 1988, the City will not provide dental insurance coverage, regardless of the type of plan, for any employee or retiree whose spouse has comparable or superior coverage as the result of employment in, or retirement from, City service as defined in Article 1.5. Said employee or retiree, however, shall receive one hundred twenty dollars ($120) per year, (ten dollars [$ I0] per credited month} payable on or before June 30 of each year as payment in lieu thereof. 
21.6 Alternate Insurance Coverage 
The Union agrees the City may seek bids for alternative dental and/or medical and hospital insurance coverage, or provide coverage by self-insurance, for its employees and/or retirees. All bid specifications or the terms of self­insurance will be submitted to the Union for its approval prior to publication. and such approval will not be unreasonably withheld. After approval and upon receipt of the bids the City may elect alternate insurance coverage. Such alternate coverage will pay the full cost of all treatment, services, or other benefits as are now enjoyed under the present plan, and it will not add to the employee's costs for insurance benefits. 
It is the intent of the City to provide benefits that are equivalent to, or better than, those currently in effect. Therefore. disputes concerning the level of benefits shall be resolved through the grievance arbitration procedure. Pending receipt of the arbitration award, benefits will remain unchanged. 
37 
ARTICLE XXII 
q 
POLICEMEN'S BILL OF RIGHTS 
2?.J Pumose 
The purpose of this Anicle is lo adopt a "Bill of Rights" for members of the Buffalo police force, setting down guidelines lo be followed by superior office in the conduct of investigations arising from the member's conduct as a police officer. 
C) 


22.2 Informin2 the Member 
{A) The member shall be infom1ed of the rank, name, and command of the officer in charge of the investigation, as well a the rank, name and command 
.'.) of the interrogating officer, and all persons present during the interrogation. lf a member is directed to leave his post and report for interrogation to another command, his own command shall be promptly notified of his whereabouts. 
(B) 
The member shall be informed of the nature of the investigation before any interrogation begins, including the name of complainant. The addresses of the complainant and/or witnesses need not be disclosed. However, the member shall be given sufficient information to reasonably apprise him of the allegations 

(C) 
lf it is known that the member is to be interrogated only as a witness, he shall be so informed at the initial notification to appear. 

(D) 
If the member is under arrest, or is likely to be, (that is, if he is a suspect or the target of a criminal investigation), he shall be informed of, and given, all his rights, pursuant to the "Miranda" decision as set forth by the Supreme Court of the United States. 



22.3 Conduct of Investi2ation 
(A) 
The guidelines set down in this Section of the Agreement shall be observed by all superior officers in conducting investigation of actions of members of the police force. 

(B) 
The interrogation of a member shall be at a reasonable hour, preferably when the member is on duty, unless the exigencies of the investigation dictate otherwise. Where practicable, interrogations should be scheduled for the daytime, -and-·the··reassignment-of-the-member-to ·the·-firsl-platoon should-be· employed. If any time is lost, the member shall be compensated. 

(C) 
The interrogation shall take place at location designated by the 


38 
8 
investigating officer. Usually it will be al the command to which the 
investigating officer is assigned, or al the precinct within which the incident 
() 
) 
\ 
j 
allegedly occurred. 
(D) 
The questioning shall not be overly long. Reasonable respites shall be showed. Time shall be provided for personal necessities, meals, telephone calls, and reasonable rest periods. 

(E) 
The member shall not be subjected to offensive language, nor shall he be threatened with transfer, dismissal, or other punishment. No promises or reward shall be made as an inducement to answer questions. 

(F) 
The complete interrogation shall be recorded, either mechanically or by a stenographer. There will be no "off the record" questions. All recesses called during the questioning shall be recorded. 

(G) 
If a member so requests, he shall be given the opportunity to consult with counsel before being questioned concerning a serious violation of the Departmental rules, provided the interrogation would not be delayed unduly thereby. In such cases, the interrogation may not be postponed past 10:00 A.M. of the day following the notification of interrogation. Counsel, if available, and a representative of a line organization may be present during the interrogation. 

(H) 
No employee covered by this Agreement shall be ordered (by the City) to submit to a polygraph test. 



22.4 Minor Violations 
In cases of investigations of minor violations of the Departmental rules, requests to consult with legal counsel or with a line organization representative will be denied unless sufficient reasons are advanced. In cases of minor violations, the investigating officer shall have discretion as to whether or not the interrogation shall be recorded. 

22.5 Disciplinary Action 
In any case, the refusal of a member to answer pertinent questions may result in disciplinary action. 
39 
ARTICLE XXIII 
q 
LONGEVITY 
() 
'.) 
) 
(A) Each permanent employee who has completed the years of service set forth in Column I below shall receive annually in addition to his salary, the payment set forth in Column II: 
The following schedule shall take effect July I, 1986: 
COLUMN I COLUMN II YEARS AMOUNT 
5-9 $ 200 10-14 400 15-19 600 20-24 800 25 1,200 
The following schedule shall take effect July I, 1986: 
COLUMN I COLUMN II YEARS AMOUNT 
5-9 $ 200 10-14 450 15-19 700 20-24 950 25 1,200 
(B) 
Eligible service for the computation of this benefit shall be determined as follows: 

(I) 
Only active services rendered in a permanent position, the salary of which is paid on an annual basis, under "personal services" of the City budget, may be counted. Seasonal and per diem service is not eligible service. Unpaid "leave time" should not be counted. 

(2) 
Service rendered by employees on a temporary or provisional basis, or in the exempt, non-competitive, or unclassified service, which immediately precedes permanent service, is eligible service. 

(3) 
An-authorized· leave of-absence without pay does· not constitute service ti me. 

(4) 
Service with any City department or agency is counted as eligible service for the computation of longevity payments, including service with the Board of Education, Municipal Rousing Authority, and the Sewer Authority. 


) 
40 
(5) 
Employees who are granted an approved leave of absence for Union activities and who remain as active employees under the terms of the New York State Retirement System will accrue longevity credit during such leave. 

(C) 
Longevity payments shall be made in a lump sum upon the close of the pay period within which the anniversary date of hire occurs including adjustments for any leave of absence(s). Longevity payments shall be included in the calculation of court time, overtime and reporting time. 

(D) 
An employee's longevity date shall be affected by all leaves of


() absence or suspensions without pay. For example, an employee's date of hire is October I, 1982. If that same employee received a six (6) month leave of absence his longevity date would be adjusted according to the length of the leave. Therefore, his new longevity date is April I, 1983. 
'.) 
J 
41 
ARTICLE XXIV 
TENURE 
Detectives, Detective Sergeants, Assistant Detective Chiefs and the Chief 
of Homicide, upon completion of eighteen ( 18) months of service, shall not be 
removed from their respective position B except for cause. 
'.) 
. C) 
42 
ARTICLEXXV 
PRINTING OF CONTRACT 
C) 
The cost of printing this Agreement in booklet form in the number of one thousand five hundred (I, 500) copies shall be borne equally by the City and the Union. Printing shall be performed in-house. 
C} 
C) 
) 
i ) 
43 
0 
0 
) 
ARTICLE XXVI 
TERMINATION 
This Agreement shall be effective as of the !st day of July, 1986 end shall remain in full force and effect until the 30th day of June, I 988. It shall be automatically renewed from year to year thereafter unless either party shall notify the other in writing sixty (60) days prior to the termination date that it desires to modify this Agreement. 
Either party may submit proposals no earlier than October I, 1987. Upon receipt of a party's request to commence negotiations and its proposals the other party must submit its proposals no later than thirty (30) days from the date of such receipt. Thereafter, the parties shall meet and commence negotiations within thirty (30) days. 
44 
0 
) 
i 
ARTICLE XXVII 
GENERAL PROVISIONS 
This Agreement and all provisions herein are subject to all applicable controlling laws and to the appropriation of funds by the Common Council. In the event that any provision herein is found to violate such laws, said provision shall not bind either of the parties, but the remainder of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect as if the invalid or illegal provision bad never been a part of this Agreement. 
45 
) 
J 
lJ 
ARTICLE XVIII 
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS 
Except as expressly limited by other provisions of this Agreement, all of the authority, rights, and responsibilities possessed by the City including, but not limited to, the right to determine the mission, methods, purposes and objectives of the City, to include the examination, selection, recruitment, hiring or promotion of employees pursuant to law, to establish specifications for each class of positions and to cla~sify or to reclassify and to allocate or to reallocate new or existing positions in accordance with law, and to discipline or discharge employees in accordance with law and the provisions of this Agreement, are retained by it. 
46 
ARTICLE XXIX 
POLICE DEPARTMENT VEHICLES 
Police Inspectors shall be assigned Police Department vehicles for official business only. 
CJ 
C) 
\ 
j 
) 
) 
47 
ARTICLEXXX 
CIVIL INDEMNIFICATION 
The provisions contained in Section 50-k of the New York State General Municipal Law regarding civil actions against employees of the City and members of the Union, are made a part of this Agreement. 
() 
. '\ 
I, ./ 
) 
I ) 
48 
IT JS AGRSEIJ BY AHD l!B'IWUII 'l'HE PAR1'JE6 'i'Hl\T ANY PROVISIOII 
or 'IBIS . MlUBllmlT IU!OUIRING Ll!GlBLATIVt ACTION TO PRI\KIT ITS IIIPLffiE!lTATlOfi BY AllEllllllBIIT or UII OR BY PflO\llDING !'H! ADDITIONAL PONDS TBBRBFO.~B, SHALL IIOT UCOl!lt BFFBCTIVB UHTlL TBlt APFROl'RIATS LBGISLA'l'IVE BOOY HAS llIVIQI APl'II0\1"1., 

.l!Pl'llOVED 
AS TO FORM ONLY JAN 71988 
.!AMUEL F. HOUSTON 



°"CJ~•Nd 
ti ' 
7J 
I 
1 
49 
Appendix A 
SALARY SCHEDULE "A"* JULY I. 1986 -DECEMBER 31. 1986 
(} 
JOB TITLE GROSS SALARY 
Police Inspector ...................................... . $34,826 
Chief Detectives ...................................... . 34,826 
Police Captain ....................................... . 31,649
() ChiefofHomicide .................................... . 31,649 Assistant Chief of Detectives............................ . 29,574 Chief, Bureau ofAdministrative Services .................. . 29,574 Police Instructor ...................................... . 29,574 Police Lieutenant ..................................... . 27,624 Polygraph Examiner ................................... . 27,624 Detective Sergeant .................................... . 25,865 Police Photographer ................................... . 25,579 Assistant Police Dispatcher ............................. . 25,579 Detective............................................ . 24,730 Police Officer ................. Step I .................. . 17,552 Step 2 .................. . 19, !03 Step 3 .................. . 20,656 Step 4 .................. . 22,208 

Step 5 .................. . 23,763 
* The above Salary Schedule includes the value of twelve (12) paid holidays at the rate oftime and one-half(! 1/2). 
) 
''. I 
_; 
50 
Appendix B SALARY SCHEDULE "B"* JANUARY I. 1987 -JUNE 30.1987 JOB TITLE GROSS SALARY 
Police Inspector ...................................... . 
Chief Detectives...................................... . 
Police Captain ....................................... .
0 
Chiefof Homicide .................................... . Assistant Chief of Detectives............................ . Chief, Bureau of Administrative Services .................. . Police Instmctor ...................................... . Police Lieutenant ..................................... . 0 Polygraph Examiner ................................... . Detective Sergeant .................................... . Police Photographer ................................... . Assistant Police Dispatcher ............................. . Detective............................................ . Police Officer. ....-............ Step l .................. . Step 2 .................. . Step 3 .................. . Step 4 .................. . Step 5 .................. . 
$35,174 35,174 31,965 31,965 29,869 29,869 29,869 27,900 27,900 26,123 25,834 25,834 24,977 17,727 19,294 20,862 22,430 24,000 
* The above Salary Schedule includes the value of twelve ( 12) paid holidays at
C) 
the rate of time and one-half ( I l /2). 
u 
51 
Appendix C SALARY SCHEDULE "C"* JULY I. 1987 · DECEMBER 31, 1987 JOB TITLE GROSS SALARY 
Police Inspector ...................................... . 
Chief Detectives ...................................... . 
Police Captain ....................................... .
0 
Chief ofHomicide .................................... . Assistant Chief of Detectives............................ . Chief, Bureau ofAdministrative Services .................. . Police Instructor ...................................... . Police Lieutenant ..................................... . 0 Polygraph Examiner ................................... . Detective Sergeant .................................... . Police Photographer ....... , ........................... . Assistant Police Dispatcher ............................. . Detective. , .......................................... . Police Officer ................. Step I .................. . Step 2 .................. . Step 3 .................. . Step 4 .................. . Step 5 . ................. . 
$36,932 36,932 33,563 33,563 31,362 31,362 31,362 29,295 29,295 27,429 27,125 27,125 26,225 18,713 20,358 22,005 23,65 I 25,300 
I. l 
* The above Salary Schedule includes the value of twelve (12) paid holidays at the rate oftime and one-half ( I 1/2). 
52 
E} 
Appendix D 
SALARY SCHEDULE "D"* JANUARY I. 1988 -JUNE 30. 1988 
() .JOB TITLE GROSS SALARY 
Police Inspector ...................................... . 
Chief Detectives ...................................... . 
Police Captain ....................................... .
0 
Chiefof Homicide .................................... . Assistant Chief ofDetectives............................ . Chief, Bureau ofAdministrative Services .................. . Police Instructor ...................................... . Police Lieutenant ..................................... . 0 Polygraph Examiner ................................... . Detective Sergeant .................................... . Police Photographer ................................... . Assistant Police Dispatcher ............................. . Detective............................................ . Police Officer ................. Step I ...••••••••.••..••• 
(l 
Step 2 .................. . Step 3 .................. . Step 4 .................. . Step 5 .................. . 
$37,301 37,301 33,898 33,898 31,675 31,675 31,675 29,587 29,587 27,703 27,396 27,396 26,487 18,900 20,561 22,225 23,887 25,553 
* The above Salary Schedule includes the value of twelve (I2) paid holidays at the rate oftime and one-half (I 1/2). 
53 








