EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT

BETWEEN
BOROUGH OF BRADDOCK HILLS
AND
DEAN W. HELINSKI, CHIEF OF POLICE

PREAMBLE
This Agreement is entered into effective the l st day of 2019, by and between the
BOROUGH OF BRADDOCK HILLS (hereinafter called the "Borough"), a Municipal
Corporation located at 1300 Brinton Road, Braddock Hills, Pennsylvania 15221, and DEAN W.
HELINSKI (hereinafter called the "Chier'), of204 Kinder Ave., Charleroi, PA 15022.
The Borough and the Chief (hereinafter collectively referred to as the "Parties"),
in consideration of their mutual promises herein set forth and their mutual interest and desire to
stabilize the Borough's relationship with the Chief, and to provide for peaceful, prompt and
equitable procedures to obtain maximum productivity, to prevent waste and unnecessary
expense, and to attain mutual understanding, harmony and cooperation between the Parties, and
agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
Uninh:.:rrupti:dOpcrali(ln and Continuous Service
1.
The Chiefrecognizes that it is necessary for the Borough's Police
Department to be operated on a twenty-four hour, seven-day-a-week basis, and that the
Borough's operations be properly manned.

2.
The Chief accepts the responsibility of insuring that every policeman
exerts every effort to assure that all shifts are properly manned at all times.

ARTICLE II
Term
This Agreement and awards shall be effective for the period from January 1, 2019
through December 31, 2021. This Agreement is specifically premised upon the Borough realizing
a level of cost savings for police services based upon the projections set forth on proposal set

r:\wp<lticslflraddockHills\pulicc chicr20l9 ngr111l
December 17. 20 I 8

forth on Exhibit "A" which is attached hereto and made part hereof. In the event that the Borough
fails to realize cost savings based upon Exhibit "A" to the extent of a minimum of $30,000.00
during calendar year 2019, then at the Borough's option, the provisions relative to the payment of
Compensation under Articles 111may be re-opened for negotiation. The Borough shall issue a
written notice of intent to re-open the Contract on or before January 15, 2020 The Borough and
Chief agree that for a period of sixty (60) days after the providing of such notice, the parties will
in good faith attempt to resolve the dispute. In the event that the Borough and Chief are unable to
reach an agreement regarding compensation by the expiration of the sixty (60) day period, then
the matter shall be submitted to binding arbitration in accordance with Act 111.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Borough shall not have the ability to reopen the
contract in the event that extraordinary circumstances can be demonstrated to establish that the
level of cost savings could not be achieved due to the existence of extraordinary or unanticipated
circumstances that were beyond the control of the Chief or Borough. Any dispute relative to this
matter shall be submitted to binding arbitration in accordance with Act 111.

In addition, in the event that the Borough is required to or believes that it is in the best
interests of the Borough to enter into a cooperative agreement with any municipal corporation,
regional police force or other government entity for police services, then the Borough agrees that
it shall use its best efforts to secure the continued employment for the Chief. Upon entering into a
cooperative agreement or contract with any municipal corporation, regional police force or other
government entity for police services, this agreement shall terminate.

ARTICLE III

Com ensalion
Effective on the dates set forth below, the base annual salary for the period of
service specified shall be:
January 1, 2019. to December 31, 2019
The annualized sum of Sixty-Three Thousand ($63,000.00) Dollars.

Januruy I. 2020 lo December 31, 2020
The annualized sum of Sixty-Three Thousand ($63,000.00) Dollars.

January 1, 2021 to December 31. 2021
The annualized sum of Sixty-Three Thousand ($63,000.00) Dollars.

ARTICLE IV
2
l'lwpdocs\Bratluock
December 17.2018

I lillslpulicc chicf2019 agrml

Benefits
The Police Chief shall be entitled to the following benefits:
(a)
Sick Leave: Sick leave is a benefit earned by service, and is
available when and if needed, and shall not be a "right of taking" such as vacations. The Police
Chief shall receive ten ( I 0) days sick leave per year with accumulation of a total of sixty ( 60)
days maximum. The Chief of Police shall notify the Mayor as soon as possible that he will be
on sick leave. If the Chief of Police is on sick leave for more than three (3) consecutive work
days, then he shall be required to submit a doctor's certificate upon returning to work.

(b)
Funt:r.11Li.!ave:The Chief of Police shall be permitted up to an
including three (3) consecutive days absence with pay when a death occurs in his immediate
family, which is limited to father, mother, wife, husband, mother-in-law, father-in law,
grandparents, child, brother, sister and grandchild.

(c)
tlulidt1vs/l'erso11alDays: The Police Chief shall receive nine (10)
work days as additional vacation days in lieu of paid holidays. In addition, the Chief shall be
entitled to four (4) personal days off. The Police Chief shall schedule the additional vacation
days and personal days after consultation and approval by the Mayor, taking into consideration
the efficiency of the Borough operations and need to provide adequate coverage by police.
The Police Chief may, at his option, in lieu of taking off on said additional
vacation days or vacation days set forth below, sell back to the Borough at the rate of
compensation provided for said calendar year in this Contract prorated on a daily basis. Buy back
of vacation days shall only occur during a regular pay period and shall be paid prior to December
31 of each year othe1wise any unused vacation days or payment shall be forfeited and shall not
carry over into the next year.

(d)

VacaLions:

The Police Chief shall be entitled to vacations as

follows:

(1)
(2)
(3)

Three (3) weeks
Three (3) weeks
Three (3) weeks

2019:

2020:
2021:

The Police Chief shall provide at least sixty (60) days advance notice to
the Mayor for vacations of five (5) consecutive days or more. For vacations of four (4) or less
consecutive days, the Police Chief shall give at least fourteen (14) days advance notice to the
Mayor. The Police Chief sha11 schedule vacations taking into consideration the efficiency of the
Borough's operations and the need to provide adequate coverage by the police.
(e)

Uniform J\llowanci.:: The base annual uniform allowance for the

3
f':\wptk1cs\13rnddockl-lillslpolicc chicf'20 I9.1g.r1111
Occc111b~r
17. 2018

Police Chief shall be Five Hundred ($550.00) Dollars and shall be paid by the Borough to the
supplier. In the event that the Borough requires new uniforms, the Borough shall supply the
Police Chief with a complete set of new uniforms.

(f)
I .01H!...:vi1v Pav: The Chief of Police shall be entitled annually to the
following longevity pay: five (5) through nine (9) years of service as Chief - $1,100.00; ten ( 10)
through fourteen( 14) years of service as Chief - $1,250.00 and fifteen ( 15) years or more service
as Chiek-$1,500.00. Prior service by the Chief as a part-time officer shalJ be used to calculate the
years of service.
(g)

(\111rl /\pp~arnn1:i.:s:Any Court appearances by lhe Police Chief

shall be considered paid as part of his annual compensation subject to reimbursement of the
following expenses:

(1)
Parking fees and other expenses related to attending Court,
up to a maximum of Ten ($10.00) DoJlars per day plus Fifty Five (.55¢) Cents per mile mileage
reimbursement for use of his personal vehicle.

(h)

Pension:The Police Chief shall be subject to the provisions of
Ordinance No. 3 of 1996 as amended establishing the Police Pension Plan for the Borough of
Braddock Hills.

(i)
, 'emin.irs. Schools. Trnining and M ~mbtrship Dt11.!l':
In the event
that the Police Chief is required by the Borough to attend any school, seminar or in-service
training, he shall continue to be compensated his salary without deduction or offset, together with
the Borough's payment for such school, seminar or training. In the event that the Police Chief
utilizes his personal vehicle to attend, then he shall be reimbursed at the rate of Thirty-Four and
one-half (.34.5¢) Cents per mile and a maximum of Ten ($10.00) Dollars for expenses. The
Borough wiJI reimburse parking expenses incurred upon presentation of a receipt and not in
excess of Eight ($8.00) Dollars. The Borough shall pay for the Chiefs membership dues for the
Allegheny County Chiefs of Police Association and Fraternal Order of Police.
(j)
Motor Vehicle: The Chief may take a police vehicle to his
home. The vehicle may only be used for transportation of the Chief to and from the Borough or
for his use in official Borough business. No person, other than the Chief in uniform, shall operate
the vehicle. No other person may occupy the vehicle unless they are in custody , under arrest or
participating in official Borough business. The Borough may restrict or eliminate the use of the
vehicle in the event that it is reasonably determined that costs associated with such use are
excessive or their exists impediments in insuring the vehicle for such use.
(k)
Li r · lnsuran1.:1.::
The Borough agrees to obtain, as Owner, a
Nationwide Insurance Universal Life Insurance Policy with a $50,000.00 death benefit in
accordance with the policy illustration attached hereto and made part hereof as Exhibit "A". The
insured shall be the Chief and the beneficiary of such policy shalJ be such person as designated
4
f:lw1>tlocs\13mddnckI lillslpolicc chicr2019ngr1111
Dc~cmhcr 17.2018

by the Chief. The Borough agrees to advance the total sum of$913.00 for payment of each
annual premium for the policy. The Chief agrees to be responsible for $413.00 of such premium.
The Chief shall reimburse the Borough the sum of$413.00 for his share of the premium by way
of payroll deduction. The reimbursement shall be prorated over each pay period. In the event that
the Chiefs employment with the Borough is·terminated for any reason, then the Borough agrees
to transfer ownership of the policy to the Chief and the Chief authorizes reimbursement to the
Borough of any un-reimbursed premium payment by way of a deduction of such un-reimbursed
amount in full from his final pay check.

ARTICLE V

The Chief will be responsible for planning, organizing and administering all
activities of the Police Department, including emergency communications and animal control.
The Chief shall report directly to the Borough Mayor. The position is considered
a management position.
ARTICLE VI
Good and Welfare Procedure
The Parties agree that it is desirable to have matters of joint concern discussed by
and between them on a regular basis. The Chief shall be available for meetings as necessary at
the discretion of the Council of the Borough and/or the Mayor.

ARTICLE VII
Civil Service Commission
The parties hereto acknowledge and agree that the Chiefs employment with the
Borough is a managerial position and shall not be subject to any applicable federal and state
overtime and/or compensatory requirements. Furthermore, the Parties agree that the Chief is
subject to the provisions of the Borough Code relative to the Civil Service Commission with
respect to firing and discipline.
AR TICLE VIII
M;111a~1.·mG11l

l{ighls

In all matters, the Dorough retains and reserves unto itself all powers, rights,
authority, duties and responsibilities conferred upon and vested in it by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.

5
f:lwpdocs\Brnddock Hillslpolicc chief 20 I 8agrm1
December I 7. 20 I 8

ARTICLE IX

This Agreement is subject to all the provisions of the Borough Code of
Pennsylvania except as specifically provided herein. This Agreement shall be interpreted in
accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

ARTICLEX

The parties mutually agree that the terms and conditions expressly set forth in this
Agreement represent the full and complete understanding.

ARTICLE XI
S~vcr:1bili1y

Any provisions of this Agreement prohibited by law shall be ineffective to the
extent of such prohibition without invalidating the remaining provisions hereof.
ARTICLE XII
Notice ofNondfacrimination
The Chief does not waive any of his rights, privileges or immunities afforded to
him under the Constitution of the United States of America or the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or any laws that flow therefrom.

ARTICLE XII
Grievance Procedure
. ·~c1io11I: A grievance shall be defined as a dispute concerning the interpretation,
application, or alleged violation of the specific terms or provisions of this Agreement. It does
not includes suspensions, terminations, and reductions in rank which shall be governed by the
Civil Service provisions of the Borough Code. Any grievance arising between the Employer
and the Chief of Police shall be settled in the following manner:

Stq> Ono::Within five (5) workdays of the date a grievance arises, the Chief of Police
shall discuss the grievance with the Mayor, or in the event of his unavailability, The Chairman of
the Public Safety Committee. If the grievance is not resolved to the mutual satisfaction of the
6
f:\wpclocs\8raddock J·lills\police chief20I 8ngnm
December 17. 2018

parties, then the grievance may be appealed by the Chief of Police to the Borough Council within
five (5) workdays following receipt of the written response of the person to whom the initial
grievance was given.
Step Two: The Borough Council or its designated representative shall, within ten ( l 0)
workdays after receipt of the appeal, meet with the aggrieved Chief of Police in attempt to adjust
the grievance. The Borough Council (or its designated representative) shall give the aggrieved
Chief of Police a written decision within five (5) workdays following the meeting. If the Chief
of Police does not proceed with the grievance to step three within the time limits specified in step
three, the grievance shall be considered to be satisfactorily resolved based on that Borough
Council's written decision.
Ste Three: Arbitration If the grievance has not been satisfactorily resolved at Step Two,
the Chief of Police may appeal the arbitration within ten (10) days after a decision at step two has
been rendered by the Borough Council. A request for arbitration shall be initiated by the Chief
of Police serving notice in writing of intent to proceed to arbitration upon the Mayor, or other
designated representative. The notice shall identify the Agreement provisions in dispute, the
issue(s) to be determined, and the employee involved. Upon receipt of a notice requesting
arbitration the parties shall attempt to select an arbitrator. If the parties cannot voluntarily agree
upon the selection of an arbitrator, they shall notify the State Mediation and Conciliation Service
of their desire to have that Service submit to the parties a panel of seven (7) arbitrators. The
parties shall then select the impartial arbitrator from such list by each party alternately removing
one name from the list until but one name remains. The person remaining shall be the impartial
arbitrator. The Employer and the Chief of Police shall alternate in striking the first name from
such lists during the term of this Agreement.
Section 2: The arbitrator's decision shall be in writing. The arbitrator shall be without
power or authority to make any decision, which requires the commission of an act prohibited by
Jaw or not authorized by law or which violates the term of this Agreement. Further, the
arbitrator shall have no power or authority to add to, subtract from, or modify the provisions of
this Agreement. Unless timely appealed pursuant to applicable statute and law, the arbitrator's
decision will be final and binding on all parties.
Seel ion 3: The grievance may be withdrawn by the Chief of Police at any time, and the
withdrawal of any grievance shall not be prejudicial to the positions taken by the parties as they
relate to that grievance or any future grievance.
Section 4: Time limits set forth in the Grievance Procedure herein shall, unless extended
by mutual written agreement of the employer and the Chief of Police, be binding upon the parties
and any grievance not filed within such time limits shall not be subject to fm1her grievance or
arbitration. Further, such grievance shall be considered settled on the basis of the decision
rendered at the last level to which the grievance was carried. Weekends and holidays do not
count.
ection 5: The expense of the impartial Arbitrator selected, the hearing room and the
transcript of the testimony, if the parties mutually agree upon having the testimony of the hearing
transcribed, shall be borne equally by the Employer and the Chief of Police.

7
1'.\\\'pdncs\11radduc~l·Iiils\policc ch ier 20 I 8,igrmI
Dcccmhcr 17. 20 I 8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties intending to be legally bound hereby set their hands
and seals the day and year first above written.

Attest:

BOROUGH OF BRADDOCK IIlLLS

~~

BY--:a,7/(,.
a,,,
Thomas Evans, President
Witness:

8
f;\wpdocs\BraddockHills\policechief20 I 3agrml
December14, 2012

AGREEMENT
between
BRADDOCK HILLS BOROUGH
and
THE BRADDOCK IDLLS POLICE ASSOCIATION
PREAMBLE

Pursuant to the Act providing for collective bargaining between Policemen and their
public employer, the Act of June 24, 1968 P.L. 237, No. 111 (hereinafter referred to as the
"Act'), this agreement is entered into this \ i
day of December, 2018, by and between the
BRADDOCK HILLS BOROUGH (hereinafter called the "Borough"), and THE BRADDOCK
HILLS POLICE ASSOCIATION (hereinafter called the "Association").
The purpose of this Agreement is to provide for certain terms and conditions relative to
the employment of full-time and part-time police by the Borough.
The Borough and the Association (hereinafter collectively referred to as the "Parties"), in
consideration of their mutual promises herein set forth and their mutual interest and desire to
stabilize the Borough's relationship with the Police and to provide for peaceful, prompt and
equitable procedures to obtain maximwn productivity, to prevent waste and unnecessary expense
and to attain mutual understanding, harmony and cooperation among the Police and between the
Parties, agree as follows:

ARTICLE I
Uninterrupted Operation and Continuous Service

1.
The Association recognizes that it is absolutely necessary for the Borough to be
operated on a twenty-four-hour, seven day a week basis and that the Borough's operations be
properly manned.

2.
The Association and the Police accept the responsibility of insuring that every
police officer exerts every effort to assure that all shifts are properly manned at all times.

f:\Braddock Hills\2019 Police Contract
December 17, 2018

ARTICLE II
HoJidavs, Personal Days and Personal Time Off (Part-time and Full-time Patrolmen)
1.
In the event that a full-time hourly police officer or part-time police officer works
any of the following holidays, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day, Christmas Eve, New Year's
Eve, New Year's Day, Martin Luther King Day, Easter Sunday, Memorial Day, the 4 th of July or
Labor Day, then he shall be paid at the rate of time and one-half for such shift at his/her
applicable rate. Payment of such rate shall be for all shifts which either commence or end on
the aforesaid holiday.
2.
Each full-time patrohnan or officer shall be entitled to receive four (4) work days
as personal days per calendar year in lieu of paid holidays. Personal days to be approved by the
Chief of Police or Mayor and scheduling of the same shall not incur overtime. Personal days
shall not be accumulated from year to year and the failure to utilize any personal days during a
year will result in the loss of the same without compensation.

ARTICLEID
Compensation
A.

Compensation Part-time Patrolmen

1.
Effective on the dates set forth below, the base salaries for all part-time police
officers shall be:

Januarv 1, 2019 through December 31, 2019
Regular part-time Patrolman
$20.00/hr.
Probationary Employee
$20.00/hr.
Sergeant:
$22.00/hr.
Januarv 1, 2020 through December 31,2020
Regular part-time Patrolman
$20.00/hr.
Probationary Employee
$20.00/hr.
Sergeant:
$22.00/hr.
January I, 2021 through December 31 1 2021
Regular part-time Patrolman
$20.00/hr.
Probationary Employee
$20.00/hr.
Sergeant:
22.00/hr.

2.
All holiday shopping center detail and special detail will be paid at the rate of
$4.00 above the officer's hourly rate, provided that the Borough is being compensated for such
detail by the property owner.

2
f:\Braddock Hills\2016 Police Contract
December 11, 2015(9:00am) File #20251

B.

Compensation Full-time Patrolmen

1.
Effective on the dates set forth below, the base annual salaries for patrolmen
designated in the following positions shall be:
January 1, 2019 through December 31, 2019:
a.
Lieutenant: $61,000.00

January 1, 2020 through December 31, 2020:
a.
Lieutenant: $61,000.00

January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021:
a.
Lieutenant: $61,000.00

The parties agree that the Borough has the sole discretion relative to filling any
vacant full-time position and shall not be mandated to maintain any full-time position if vacant.

ARTICLE IV
Overtime (Part-time and Full-time Patrolmen)

All non-exempt Police employees shall be paid one and one-half times the hourly rate for
all hours worked in excess of forty (40) hours during any week. There shall be no pyramiding
of weekly overtime pay. The hourly rate for full-time policemen is to be computed by dividing
the total salary of the individual police officer by 2,080. For the purpose of determining
overtime, the first 30 minutes of work beyond the end of the officer's regular shift shall not
count. If the officer works in excess of 30 minutes in any week, he will be paid at least
one-hour's pay. Any overtime beyond that shall be on a fully-compensated basis. All overtime
shall be divided as equally as possible among all police employees within rank. Premium pay
(sick, vacation, personal days) shall not be utilized as a basis for determining overtime.
The Borough and Association agree that Lieutenant position is a salaried full -time
supervisory position and shall be considered as an exempt position for purposes of overtime
under the Fair Labor Standards Act.
All hourly wage rate police officers may choose to receive compensatory time in lieu of
overtime pay at the rate of 1½ hours for each hour of overtime worked, but in no event shall an
officer be permitted to accumulate more than forty (40) overtime hours, which equates to sixty
(60) hours of compensatory time. Officers wishing to use accumulated compensatory time shall
request to do so at least five (5) work days prior to the day being requested. Scheduled vacation
days and personal days have priority over requested compensatory time off.
3
f:\Braddock Hills\2019 Police Contract
December 17, 2018

Any accwnulated, unused compensatory time held by an officer as of November 30 of
each calendar year shall be paid for by the employer in the first pay of December of each year at
the officer's regular rate of pay. Compensatory time shall begin to accumulate on December 1 of
each year for the next succeeding twelve (12) months, but compensatory time cannot be used in
December.
Compensatory time may only be used when it does not trigger overtime opportunities and
used compensatory time shall not constitute hours actually worked for determining overtime
eligibility. A record of compensatory time accumulated and used shall be kept by the Borough,
with the hours being checked on a periodic basis.
ARTICLEV
Probationary Employees (Part-time and Full-time Patrolmen) and Senioritv (Full-Time)

All new employees (part-time and full-time) covered by this Agreement shall be
probationary employees commencing from the date of employment and continuing for a period
of six (6) months, during which time they can be summarily suspended or discharged by the
Borough. If a probationary employee is retained beyond the six (6) month period, his or her
seniority shall date back to the date of employment and he or she shall be classified as a regular
part-time or full-time employee and be compensated as such.
Seniority for full-time hiring shall be based upon the date of hire and order of hire in the
event that hiring occurs on the same date. Layoffs of full-time employees in accordance with the
Borough Code shall occur in inverse order of seniority.

ARTICLE VI
Uniform Allowance

A.

Uniform Allowance Part-time Patrohnen

1.
The base annual uniform allowance for part-time patrolmen shall be paid pursuant
to the following schedule for 2019-2021:
(a)

In the event that a police employee works an average of 1,048 hours in the
prior calendar year, then the uniform allowance will be $450.00.

(b)

In the event that a police employee works more than 750 and no more than
1,048 hours in the prior calendar year, then the uniform allowance will be
$325.00.

(c)

In the event that a police employee works less than 750 hours in the prior
calendar year, then the uniform allowance will be $275.00.
All part-time new hires will be provided one shirt and one pair of pants by

4
r:\Braddock Hills\2019 Police Contract
December 17, 2018

the Borough at the Borough's sole cost and expense. Upon completion of
the probationary period, the part-time employee will receive a base annual
uniform allowance as provided for part-time patrolmen as set forth in this
article.
The amounts expended shall be paid by the Borough directly to the
supplier. Part-time officers must reimburse the Borough a prorated
amount of the uniform allowance upon termination of his/her employment
based upon the date of termination and receipt of the uniform allowance.
For example, if a $325.00 uniform allowance is paid on April 1, 2019 and
termination of employment occurs on July 1, 2019, the terminated officer
would reimburse the Borough $243.75, calculated as follows:
$325.00 allowance X 9/12

= $243.75

2.
In the event that the Borough requires new uniforms, the Borough shall supply
each police employee with a complete set of new uniforms.
3.
The Borough mandates that all of its police officers utilize and wear bullet-proof
vests while in the employ of the Borough. All new police hires will be required to have such a
vest upon commencement of employment.
4.
The police officers authorize the Borough to deduct from their final paychecks
any amount due the Borough under Paragraph 2 above and agree to pay any deficiency within
thirty (30) days of termination.

5.
The requirements of Paragraph 2 above regarding uniform allowance
supersede any prior written agreements and authorizations executed by any police officers.

B.

shall

Uniform Allowance Full-time Patrolmen

The base annual uniform allowance for full-time patrolmen or officer shall be paid
pursuant to the following schedule:
2019

2020

2021

$550.00

$550.00

$550.00

The amounts expended shall be paid by the Borough to the supplier.

5
f:\Braddock Hills\2019 Police Contract
December 17, 2018

ARTICLE VII
Vacations (Full-time Patrolmen)
1.

Vacations for full-time policemen shall be as follows:
a)

0 to 1 year ............. , ............... one (1) week

b)

1 through 5 years .................. two (2) weeks

c)

6 through 10 years .................. tlµ-ee (3) weeks

d)

10 years or more ..................... four (4) weeks

2.
The Vacation List for police employees shall be posted by January 15 of each
year. The police employee shall select his vacation days in the following manner:
For vacations of five (5) consecutive days or more, the police employee shall give
at least sixty (60) days advance notice of said request.
For vacations of four (4) or less consecutive days, the police employee shall give
at least 14 days advance notice of said selection.

3.
The Borough shall then schedule vacations taking into consideration efficiency of
Borough operations and the need to provide adequate coverage by police. Vacation scheduling
shall take into consideration the length of service of each police employee within rank wherever
possible. The Chief of Police and any person acting as OIC shall not schedule or take vacation at
the same time.

ARTICLE VIII
Longevity Pav (Full-Time Patrolmen)
Full-Time Patrolmen, who have completed the following combined years of service as
full-time or part-time Patrolmen in the employ of the Borough of Braddock Hills, shall be paid
the following lump swn longevity payment each year:

YEARS OF SERVICE

LONGEVITY PAYMENT

5 through 9 years

$750.00

10 through 14 years

$1000.00

15 or more years

$1250.00

Payment shall be made at the first pay period in June of each year.

6
f:\Braddock Hills\2019 Police Contract
December 17, 2018

ARTICLE IX
Sick Leave (Full-time Patrolmen)

I.
It is ooderstobd by both the Borough and Police that sick leave is a benefit earned
by service and is available when and if needed, and shall not be a "right of taking" such as
vacations.
2.
Each full-time police employee shall receive 10 days sick leave per year with
accumulation of a total of sixty (60) days maximum. No payment of unused sick time shall be
required upon separation from employment.
3.
Police shall notify their immediate supervisor as soon as possible that they will be
on sick leave.
4.
Policemen who are on sick leave for more than three (3) consecutive work days
shall be required to submit a doctor's certificate upon returning to work. The Mayor and/or
Chief of Police may require a doctor's certificate after one day's sick leave in event they
reasonably believe that sick leave is being abused.

ARTICLEX
Bereavement Leave (Full-time Patrolmen)

Full-time and part-time patrohnen are permitted up to and including three (3) consecutive
days absence with pay when a death occurs in the immediate family, which is limited to father,
mother, wife, husband, mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandparent, child, brother and sister.
ARTICLE XI
Pension (Full-time Patrolmen)

1.
All pensions for police employees shall be subject to the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with respect thereto.
2.
The parties incorporate the terms and conditions of the existing Police Pension
Plan, as embodied and approved in Ordinance No. 3 of 1996, as amended.
·

ARTICLE XII
Court Appearances (Part-time and Full-time Patrolmen)

I.
For the purposes of this Article, Court Appearances shall include any and all
appearances before courts of record, district justices, magistrates, governmental agencies having
subpoena power and meetings with the district attorney or an assistant district attorney where the
police employee's attendance is required as a result of and arising out of the Performance of his
duties as a police employee.

7
f:\Braddock Hills\20 I 9 Police Contract
December 17, 2018

2.
Police employees shall be reimbursed for parking fees and other expenses directly
related to attending court up to a maximum of ten ($10.00) dollars per day, plus thirty-four and
one-half ($.345) cents per mile mileage reimbursement.
3.
In the event a hourly wage police employee is required to make a court
appearance before a District Justice for a Preliminary Hearing for a violation of the Crimes
Code, he shall be credited with four (4) hours of service for that appearance.
In the event that the hourly police employee is required to attend a Criminal Court
proceeding before the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County or Office of the Coroner of
Allegheny County during a morning session of the Court, he shall be credited with four (4) hours
of service. In the event that the officer is required to also attend an afternoon Court session, he
shall be credited with eight (8) hours of service for the day.

4.
Where a hourly wage police employee appears before a District Justice with
respect to any Offenses committed under the Vehicle Code or a Non-Traffic Summary Offenses
and the nwnber of hearings for such officer totals five (5) or less hearings for the Court session,
he shall be credited two (2) hours of service for that day. In the event that the number of hearings
exceeds five (5) for the Court session, he shall be credited three (3) hours of service for that day.
5.
Payments pursuant to Paragraph 3 above shall be subject to written verification of
the time expended.
6.
In the event that an hourly wage police officer is on duty during his/her scheduled
Court appearance, then they shall not be entitled to any additional compensation other than
his/her shift pay.

ARTICLE XIII
Other Matters Affecting Compensation (Part-time and Full-time Patrolmen)

1.
Where a police employee is required by the Borough to attend any school,
seminar or in service training relating to police work, any day in attendance over five (5) hours,
will be compensated as an eight hour day. Where attendance is required four (4) hours or less,
the police employee shall be entitled to mileage reimbursement at a rate of Fifty-Five ($.55)
cents per mile if the employee uses his personal vehicle for transportation. Where attendance is
required for more than four (4) hours, the employee shall also be paid ten dollars ($10.00) plus
mileage reimbursement at a rate of .345 cents per mile if the employee uses his personal vehicle
for transportation.
2.

Police employees will be paid every other Thursday by 7:00 o'clock a.m.

8
f:\Braddock HiUs\2019 Police Contract
December 17,2018

ARTICLE XIV
Grievances {Part-time and Full-time Patrolmen)

1.

Grievance Procedure Definitions:

a)
Grievance - An alleged breach or violation of this Contract or a dispute
arising out of the interpretation or application of the provisions of this Contract.
b) Grievant - Any employee or group of employees claiming the alleged
breach or violation of this Contract or claiming a dispute has arisen out of the interpretation or
application of the provisions of this Contract.
2.

Scope of Grievance Procedure:

a) Any matter not specifically covered by any provisions of this Contract as
well as any matter reserved to the discretion of the Borough by the statutes, legal precedents, and
regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Civil Service Commission for Firemen and
Police and/or by the terms of this Agreement is not a grievance and will not be construed as a
grievances.
b)
3.

This procedure is to be utilized in all cases.

Informal Settlement of Alleged Grievances:

a) Any grievant shall first discuss and attempt to settle the alleged grievance
at the lowest appropriate level; i.e., an employee will discuss the matter with his immediate
supervisor.
b) The grievant may attempt to resolve the alleged grievance informally,
either directly or through the Braddock Hills Police Association's designated representative.
4.

Procedural Steps for Grievance Processing:
a)

Level One - Immediate Supervisor:

If the Braddock Hills Police Association is not satisfied with the informal
disposition of the alleged grievance, such alleged grievance may be reduced to writing within
seven calendar days from its occurrence or within seven calendar days from the time the grievant
should have known or been aware of the existence of the situation giving rise to the alleged
grievance. The written grievance will be filed with the same person with whom the informal
settlement attempts were previously made. Representatives of the Borough and the Braddock
Hills Police Association shall meet either with or without the presence of the grievant and
attempt to settle the grievance.

9
f:\Braddock Hills\2019 Police Contract
December 17, 2018

b)

Level Two - Mayor:

If the alleged grievance is not satisfactorily resolved within five (5)
calendar days from the submission of it in writing at Level One, the Braddock Hills Police
Association may submit the alleged grievance in writing to the Mayor and/or his designated
representative within five calendar days after the decision at Level One, or ten calendar days
after the presentation of the alleged grievance in Level One, whichever shall first occur.
Representatives of the parties shall meet and attempt to settle the grievance.

c)

Level Three -The Council:

If the Braddock Hills Police Association is dissatisfied with the decision at
Level Two, or no decision is rendered within five days of the submission of the alleged
grievance at Level Two, the Braddock Hills Police Association may within five calendar days
after a decision at Level Two or ten calendar days after the grievance was submitted at Level
Two, whichever shall first occur, submit the grievance in writing to the Borough council or their
designee. The Borough or their designee will consider the merits of the alleged grievance and
render a written decision within twelve calendar days of the submission of the alleged grievance
to them.
d)

Level Four - Arbitration:

If the Association is not satisfied with the decision at Level Three, it shall,
within five (5) calendar days after a decision at Level Three, or within fifteen (15) calendar days
after the alleged grievance was submitted at Level Three, whichever is sooner, submit the
grievance to the American Arbitration Association and request that a list of Arbitrators be issued.
Arbitration proceedings shall then be commenced, with the selection of an Arbitrator from the
panel of Arbitrators requested. The Borough will strike a name from this panel, and the parties
shall then strike alternately until only one proposed Arbitrator remains. This person shall become
the Arbitrator for the arbitration proceeding. The decision of this Arbitrator shall be in writing
and shall be final and binding. The Arbitrator shall be authorized only to clarify and interpret the
express terms, provisions or clauses of this Agreement and does not have the authority to
enlarge, alter, modify, delete or change the express terms, provisions or clauses of this
Agreement. Fees and expenses of the American Arbitration Association and the Arbitrator shall
be borne equally in every case by the Borough and the Association.

e)
It is expressly agreed that the parties may, by agreement, enlarge the time
limits provided for in the grievance procedure.

10
f:\Braddock Hills\2019 Police Contract
December 17, 2018

ARTICLE XV
Good and Welfare Procedure (Part-time and Full-time Patrolmen)

1.
The parties agree that it is desirable to have matters of joint concern discussed by
and between them on a regular basis. Therefore, a meeting shall be scheduled at the call of
either party on five (5) days written notice to the other party to take up matters affecting the good
and welfare of the employees and the Borough.
2.
At least three (3) days prior to such meeting, the designees of the parties shall
confer to prepare a mutually acceptable agenda for such meeting.
3.
It is understood and agreed that grievances will be resolved through grievance
procedure and will not be taken up at a good and welfare meeting.
4.
In the event a grievance is improperly placed in this procedure and not in the
grievance procedure, it shall be transferred to the grievance procedure without prejudice
providing the original filing under this paragraph met the time limits pertaining to the grievance
procedure.

ARTICLE XVI
Terms and Conditions

All existing benefits and terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with this
agreement and the above awards shall remain in full force and effect.

ARTICLE XVII
Term of Agreement

This Agreement and awards shall be effective for the period from January 1, 2019
through December 31, 2021. This Agreement is specifically premised upon the Borough
realizing a level of cost savings for police services based upon the projections set forth on
proposal set forth on Exhibit "A" which is attached hereto and made part hereof. In the event that
the Borough fails to realize cost savings based upon Exhibit "A" to the extent of a minimum of
$30,000.00 during calendar year 2019, then at the Borough's option, the provisions relative to
the payment of Compensation under Articles III may be re-opened for negotiation. The Borough
shall issue a written notice of intent to re-open the Contract on or before January 15, 2020 The
Borough and Association agree that for a period of sixty (60) days after the providing of such
notice, the parties will in good faith attempt to resolve the dispute. In the event that the Borough
and Association are unable to reach an agreement regarding compensation by the expiration of
the sixty (60) day period, then the matter shall be submitted to binding arbitration in accordance
with Act 111.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Borough shall not have the ability to reopen the
contract in the event that extraordinary circumstances can be demonstrated to establish that the
level of cost savings could not be achieved due to the existence of extraordinary or unanticipated
11
f:\Braddock Hills\2019 Police Contract
December 17, 2018

circumstances that were beyond the control of the Association or Borough. Any dispute relative
to this matter shall be submitted to binding arbitration in accordance with Act 111.
In addition, in the event that the Borough is required to or believes that it is in the best
interests of the Borough to enter into a cooperative agreement with any municipal corporation,
regional police force or other government entity for police services, then the Borough agrees that
it shall use its best efforts to secure the continued employment for the Borough's police force.
Upon entering into a cooperative agreement or contract with any municipal corporation, regional
police force or other government entity for police services, this agreement shall terminate.
ARTICLE XVIII
Scheduling

The parties acknowledge that scheduling is a management prerogative as exercised by the
Mayor pursuant to the Borough Code with the following exceptions:
(a) To the extent possible, there will be a minimwn of eight (8) hours off
between shifts when two (2) shifts are worked with fewer than eight (8) hours between. The
second shift will be paid at straight time. If scheduled to work a second shift within a
twenty-four (24) hour period, the second shift will be paid at time and one-half

(b) The provisions of the Police Policy and Procedure Manual shall govern
with respect to the designation of a shift supervisor.

ARTICLE XIX
Police Policy Manual

The terms and conditions of this Contract shall supersede any conflicting term of the
manual.
ARTICLE XX
Effect of Agreement

The Parties mutually agree that the terms and conditions expressly set forth in this
agreement and awards represent the full and complete understanding, agreement and
commitment between the parties hereto. In the event that the Borough hires a full-time police
officer and/or re-establishes the employment of a former full-time officer who was furloughed,
then the parties agree to negotiate wages and benefits applicable to such position.

ARTICLEXXI
Management Rights

In all matters, the Borough retains and reserves unto itself all powers, rights, authority,
12
f:\Braddock Hills\2019 PoJice Contract
December 17,2018

duties and responsibilities conferred upon and vested m it by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
RTICLEXXII
Civil Service Commission
The Borough shall, pursuant to the provisions of the Pennsylvania Borough Code,
establish a Civil Service Commission and confer upon it the powers and obligations required by
law.

ARTICLE XXIII
Severability

Any provisions of this agreement prohibited by law shall be ineffective to the extent of
such prohibition without invalidating the remaining provisions hereof.

ARTICLE XXIV
Borough Code

This Agreement is subject to all the provisions of the Borough Code of Pennsylvania.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Parties have executed this Agreement on the day and year
first set forth above.

ATTEST:

BOROUGH OF BRADDOCK HILLS

B&:efJ?/1,,.,v}--

f!.-a-,,-,t4---

Thomas Evans, President of Council
THE BRADDOCK HILLS
POLICE ASSOCIATION

WITNESS:

YL1fic

13
f:\Braddock Hills\2019 Police Contract
December 17, 2018

