AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE
NORTHERN REGIONAL POLICE DEPARTMENT BOARD
AND THE
NORTHERN REGIONAL POLICE ASSOCIATION
Originally Effective

2013 - 2014 - 2015

Hereby Extended Effective

January 1, 2016 - December 31, 2020
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
CONTRACT EXTENSION

Whereas, the Northern Regional Police Department Board (““NRPD”) and the Northen
Regional Police Association (“Union”) have engaged in “Early Bird” negotiations on an extension

to the current (2013-2015) collective bargaming agreement;

NOW, THEREFORE, tending to be legally bound, the parties hereby agree the extended

colkctive bargaining agreement shall provide the following terms and conditions.

* Term: Five Years - January |, 2016 through December 31, 2020.

° Officer Base Salaries

 

 

2016 2017 2018 2019 3020
2.75% 2.75% 2.75% 2.75% 2.75%
§2.267.43 $2,329.78 $2,393.85 $2,459.68 $2,527.32
$84,719.43 $87,049.21 $89,443.06 $91,902.74 $94,430.06

 

S Salaries for Officers hired after January 1, 2013:

I“ Year:

2™ Year:
3" Year:
4" Year:
5"" Year:

6" Year

7° Year:

. DROP:

Effective January |, 2016 addition of a three year DROP beginning when an officer reaches
his/her Normal Retirement Date, or in the case of officers hired prior to January |, 2013 upon
obtamment of at least age 52 and a minimum of 25 years of service. The DROP program
shall mclude the following provisions:

(a) Annual open enrollment period (July [* - December 31°} subject to the

2016 - 2020

$43,050
$47,150
$53,300
$60,475
$68,675
$76,875
Full Base Rate

following maximum DROP participation period.

 
DROP Commencement Occurring In Maximum DROP Participation Period

Initial Open Enrollment Period 3 Years
Second Open Enrollment Period 3 Years
Third Open Enroltment Period 2 Years
Fourth Open Enrollment Period | Year
Fifth Open Enrollment Period Not Eligible

(b) Elimination of COLA calculations during period of DROP panicipation

(c) Uniform purchases during an officers participation in the DROP shall be approved
in advance by the Chief of Police.

(d) The terms and conditions of the DROP shall be stated and fisther described in an
amendment to the NRPD Pension Plan which shall be prepared by the actuary and
submitted to the Officers Association.

Affordable Care Act - Cadillac Tax

If the NRPD receives notice or information indicating that its health care plan costs will
subject the plan to the Affordable Care Act’s “Cadillac Tax” excise tax, the NRPD will give
the Union written notice of that fact and the parties will immediately meet to discuss changes
in the plan design, plan and/or plan carrier in order to avoid the imposition of the tax. If no
agreement ts reached with fourteen (14) days of the NRPD’s wniten notice to the Union
regarding this issuc, then the partics will procced to an expedited arbitration proceeding with
an arbitrator selected pursuant to the terms of the Collective Bargaining Agreement’s
grievance and arbitration procedure. The sole pwpose for that expedited arbitration
proceeding will be for the arbitrator to modify the plan, plan design and/or plan cartier in
order to eliminate the exposure to the Cadillac Tax. The decision of the arbitrator on this
issue shall be issued within forty-five (45) calendar days of the NRPD’s written notice that
the plan is subject to the “Cadillac Tax.”

Ne
Notwithstanding any other language in this Agreement regarding employee health
contributions, in no event shall any employee contribute more than the maximum amount
deemed affordable under applicable Affordable Care Act provisions and regulations in effect
at the time of the contribution.

Section XJ: Dispute Resolution shall be amended as follows:

11.2 Definition - A grievance is a dispute conceming the mterpretation, application or
alleged violation of the expressed terms of this Agreement and all matters of
discipline. There shall be no discipline except for just cause.

11.3. Grievance Procedure -

Step 3 - If the Grievance Commitee is not satisfied with the disposition of the grievance at
the second step, or if no decision is received within the time period prescribed in Step 2, it
may be appealed to arbitration within five (5) business days affer recciving a decision at the
second step or when the second step decision is duc. A request for arbitration may be
intiated by the Grievance Committee serving upon the Joint Police Board a notice mn writing
of an intent to procced to arbitration. Upon receipt of a notice requesting arbitration, the
partics shall meet to select an Arbitrator. If the partics cannot agree on the selection of a
neutral Arbitrator, the parties shall request a list of seven (7) local Arbitrators from the
American Arbitrators Association, who are approved by the National Academy of
Arbitrators. The parties shall strike names from the list of Arbitrators with the Police Board
sinking first until one (1) name remains. Thercaffer, the parties will alienate the right to
strike first. The American Arbitrators Association will be notified of the Arbitrator selected
and the hearing shall be held on a date and time and at a location mutually agreed upon by
the Jomt Police Board and the Grievance Committee. The parties shall bear the expenses

of preparmg and presenting their respective cases.

All other provisions of the current (2013-2015) Collective Bargaming Agreement remain

unchanged.
This written Memorandum of Understanding contains the entire agreement between the
Parties regarding this matter and supersedes any and all other agreements or understanding, whether
ora] or written.

The parties affirm that they have read and understood this Memorandum of Understanding,
have had the opportunity to discuss it with legal counsel and are authorized to legally bind the party
on whose behalf they have signed.

C WoC Cane

Norther | Regional Police Department Board

Date:_ OT [7. QO(G>

Northen Rego | Police seo
vA

Date: 7T-BNS

 
8.1c

MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

TO CORRECT THE PENNSYLVANIA AUDITOR GENERAL’S OBSERVATION

ON THE POLICE PENSION. SECTION VIII_8.1 ¢ - EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS

Emplovee Contributions

i.

ii.

Effective for Employees hired prior to January 1, 2013, each Participant shall as a
requirement of participation pay regular contributions to the Pension Fund in an
amount equal to five percent (5.0%) of the Participant’s annual Compensation.
Notwithstanding the above, each Participant will not contribute to the Pension Fund
an amount greater than five percent (5%) of the Participant’s annual Compensation.
Each Participant shall complete the necessary forms to authorize of the payment of
Participant contributions by way of payroll deduction. The Participant Contributions
required under this Section shall be “picked up” by the Employer and shall be treated
as Employer contributions pursuant to Code Section IRS 414(h)(2).

Effective for Employees hired on or after January 1, 2013, each Participant shall as
a requirement of participation pay regular contributions to the Pension Fund in
amount equal to five percent (5.0%) of the Participants annual base salary
Compensation. Notwithstanding the above, each Participant will not contribute to
the Pension Fund an amount greater than five percent (5%) of the Participant’s
annual base salary. Each Participant shall complete the necessary forms to authorize
of the payment of Participant contributions by way of payroll deduction. The
Participant Contributions required under this Section shall be “picked up” by the
Employer and shal! be treated as Employer contributions pursuant to Code Section

IRS 414(h)(2).
iil. Reduction of Participant Contributions - Notwithstanding the preceding section 8.1
c, payments into the Pension Fund by Participants may be reduced below the
minimum percentages prescribed in Section 8.1 c, or may be eliminated, provided:
Ll. The current actuarial study indicates that the condition of the Plan is such that
contributions may be reduced or eliminates;

2. Contributions by the Employer will not be required to keep the Pension Fund
actuarially sound; and

3. Any reduction or elimination of contributions is authorized on an annual
basis by an Ordinance or Resolution of the Employer.

This written Memorandum of Understanding contains the entire agreement between the
parties regarding this matter and supersedes any and all other agreements or understanding, whether
oral or written.

The parties affirm that they have read and understood this Memorandum of Understanding,

have had the opportunity to discuss it with legal counsel and are authorized to legally bind the party
on whose behalf they have signed.

CH? Cllwo

Northern Regional Police Department Board

Date: OF. [XO QO\|b

cE (pela.

Nertffern Regional Police Assbciation \)

Date: LLL $-Fl-/¢°
Et NAG

 

AGREEMENT
BETWEEN THE
NORTHERN REGIONAL POLICE DEPARTMENT BOARD
AND THE
NORTHERN REGIONAL POLICE ASSOCIATION

FOR

2013-2014-2015

November 29, 2012
Section I.

Section II.

Section III.

Section IV.

Section V.
Section VI:
Section VII.
Section VIIL
Section IX.

Section X.

CONTENTS
AGREEMENT SUMMARY AND APPROVALS

SALARIES AND OTHER DIRECT MONETARY COMPENSATION
1.1 Full-Time Officer Wage Schedule

1.2 New Officers Salaries

13 Lieutenant and Sergeant Salary

1.4 Detective

1.5 Longevity

1.6 Officer-in-Charge (0.1.C) Wage

1.7. Additional Factors Affecting Wages

TIME-OFF
2.1 Vacations
2.2 Holidays

2.3 Personal Days

2.4 Bereavement Leave

2.5 Compensatory Time

WORK WEEK - SCHEDULING - SHIFT ASSIGNMENTS
3.1 Work Week

3,2. Scheduling ~— Shift Assignments

HEALTH BENEFITS

4.1 Medical Benefits

4.2 Dental Benefits

SICK LEAVE

DISABILITY BENEFITS

LIFE INSURANCE

PENSION

UNIFORM AND EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE/CANINE CARE
ALLOWANCE

9.1 Uniform and Equipment Allowance

9.2. Canine Care Allowance

QUALIFICATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS

10.1 Training

10.2 Residency
Section XI. DISPUTE RESOLUTION

Section XII. REPRIMANDS, COMMENDATIONS, DISCIPLINARY ACTION
Section XII. MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

Section XIV. TERM
AGREEMENT SUMMARY AND APPROVALS
Agreement dated this 24 day of NoUEm|es 2012 by and between the Northern
Regional Police Department Board and the members of the Northern Regional Police
Association.

Witnesseth

WHEREAS, the members of the Northern Regional Police Association
(“Association” or “Union”) and the Northern Regional Police Department Board (‘Joint
Police Board”) wish to continue the operation of the policc force in the same spirit of

community service and cooperation which has been the hallmark of such Force;

WHEREAS, the Police Negotiating Committee has been duly elected to represent the

members of the Northern Regional Police Association;

NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of these prcmiscs, and the obligations
contained herein, and for other good and valuable consideration, the receipt and sufficiency
of which are hereby acknowledged, and intending to be legally bound, the parties do hercby

agree as follows:

Section 1. SALARIES AND OTHER DIRECT MONETARY COMPENSATION
Ll Full-Time Officer Wage Schedule
For full-time officers hired before January 1, 2013 the wage schedule, starting
from the 2012 value ($76,566.13) pursuant to the agreement of September
2010, shall be increased for the years 2013, 2014 and 2015 as follows:

January 1, 2013 $78,174.02 2.1%
January 1, 2014 $80,128.37 2.5%
January 1, 2015 $82,452.09 2.9%
1.2. New Full-Time Officer Salaries for Officers Hired on or after January 1, 2013
New Officer Salaries
2013-2014-2015

1* year: $42,000
2™ year: $46,000
3" year: $52,000
4" year: $59,000
5" year: $67,000
6" year: $75,000
7 year: Refer to 1.1

1.3 Lieutenant and Sergeant
For all persons promoted to the positions of Lieutenant or Sergeant as of the

effective date of this agreement the following:
a, A Lieutenant will receive a 12.0% differential based on the top pay

grade of an officer.

b. A sergeant will receive an 8.0% differential based on the top pay grade
of an officer,
1.4 Detective

The Joint Police Board may, upon the recommendation of the Chief of Police,
appoint an officer to the position of "Detective". The duties of such Detective
Shall be determined and assigned by the Chief of Police. The Detective shall
receive a wage with a four (4%) percent additional differential based on the
top pay grade of an officer. The Detective may utilize up to seventy-five
(75%) percent of his individual uniform and equipment allowance, as set forth
in Section IX of the Agreement, toward the purchase of plainclothes items
necessary for duties as Detective.

1.5 Longevity
Longevity compensation will be paid on the following schedule:
See attached schedule.
The longevity compensation will be effective on the anniversary date of full-
time, continuous service employment and will be paid with the first regular

pay period thereafter.
1.6

1.7

Officer in Charge (O.LC.}) Wage

Every effort shall be made to insure that a supervising officer is scheduled for

every shift. In the instances where this is not practicable, the senior patrol
officer on the shift shall serve as the “Officer in Charge” of the shift and shall

receive compensation at 106.0% of his or her applicable rate.

The Chief of Police shall have the right, with cause, to prohibit a patrolman

from serving as an “Officer in Charge.” Any patrolman so prohibited will not

serve as OIC of any shift, nor receive OIC compensation until re-instated by

the Chief of Police. In these instances, the next senior officer on the shift will
be OIC, and will receive OIC pay.

Additional Factors Affecting Wages

a.

Call Back/Call Out

Minimum four hours pay at 1% times base hourly rate. In the event an
officer is called out less than four (4) hours before the start of his/her
shift or held over for less than four (4) hours after the end of his/her
shift the officer shall be paid time and one half for all additional hours
actually worked as opposed to a minimum guarantee. (For example,
an officer called out two (2) hours before the start of his/her shift or
held over two (2) hours after his/her shift, shall receive two (2) hours
of overtime pay as opposed to the guarantee.)

Overtime

An officer who works more than 40 hours during his/her work week
and/or a full-time officer who works more than 8 hours per work day
shall be paid overtime. All overtime ta be approved by the Chief of
Police or his designee. This overtime must be approved by the Shift
Supervisor. Payment will be made in the pay period immediately
following the pay period the overtime occurred. An officer will receive
double time compensation if forced to extend his/her shift due to no
relief. All overtime work will be distributed fairly and equitably to all
officers. There shall be no pyramiding of overtime. Paid leave shall

count towards hours worked for overtime purposes.
c.

Overtime Callout List

In order to promote the fair and equitable distribution of overtime,
an overtime list and callout procedure will be established as

follows:

. An overtime list will be established for private-contract, detail and shift

overtime. An officer may chose to opt out from the list, provided they
do so in writing to the Chief.
The list will be based on hours assessed, and will reset on January 1" of

each year.

. When a detail/shift is offered, the officer will be assessed the number of

hours for the detail if he is contacted and accepts or refuses the detail.

. If two or more officers have the same number of assessed hours, they

will be contacted by seniority.

. The officer will not be assessed the detail hours if there is no contact or

they are unable to take the detail due to working a regular shift, another
detail, court, or personal time (vacation, holiday pay, personal days, and
compensatory time).

When contacting an officer for overtime, if he does not answer this will

be considered no contact. No messages will be left.

. Ifa detail/shift becomes available less than three hours before the start

of the detail/shift, it will be filled by the most expeditious means
possible, regardless of the overtime list hours worked. The officer will
be assessed hours worked for overtime distribution.

Court time and shift extension overtime will not count towards assessed
hours.

In the event of an error in the assignment of overtime, the sole remedy
shall be to move the aggrieved officer to the top of the list for the next
over time duty.

If an officer must be called out for shift overtime, they will be

contacted as follows:
1. Officers on pass days, with the least number of assessed hours on
overtime list.

2. Based on assessed hours, officers may split the shift. If two or more
eligible officers have the same number of assessed hours, the senior
officer will be called first. This will NOT be considered forced
overtime.

3. Based on assessed hours, officers will be offered double shift (no night
turn to day light allowed). This will NOT be considered to be forced
overtime.

d, Court Pay for Off-Duty Officer, Sergeant and Lieutenant

Payment will be a rate of time and one-half over forty (40) hours

per week or eight (8) hours per day as listed:

Time Spent Hours Paid
0-60 minutes 1.5
61-120 minutes 3.0
121-180 minutes 4.5
181-240 minutes 6.0

This pattern will continue for longer periods of time. "Court Pay"
will include off duty time spent on call for court appearance
pursuant to subpoena. "On Call" status will be monitored through
the police station.
e. Travel Time pay for Off-Duty Officer, Sergeant and Lieutenant

An off-duty officer who appears at a local magistrate hearing shall
be compensated for thirty (30) minutes travel! time to the hearing
and thirty (30) minutes travel time from the hearing, at a rate of
time and one-half, in addition to time spent at the hearing. An off-
duty officer who appears at any court related proceeding outside of
the local magistrates office shall be compensated for sixty (60)
minutes travel time to the proceeding and sixty (60) minutes travel
time from the proceeding, at the rate of time and one-half, in

addition to time spent at the hearing.
f. Civil Subpoenas

An officer who receives a civil subpoena resulting from any official
action as a Northern Regional Police Officer will have their
schedule adjusted to accommodate said subpoena, and will allow
the officer to attend court on duty, provided such adjustment does

not result in overtime.
Section II.
2.1

a.

TIME-OFF
Vacations
Entitlement to vacations shall be based upon the years of service to be

completed within the calendar year based upon the following schedule.

2™ year through 4" year 10 days
5" year through 9" year 15 days
10" year through 15" year 20 days
16" year 21 days
17" year 22 days
18" year 23 days
19" year 24 days
20" year through 24" year 25 days
25" year and after 30 days

As applied to probationary police officers, entitlement to vacations shall be

based on the following schedule during the calendar year in which the

probationary period ends:
Probation Period Ends Vacation Days

January | - February 28 10

March | - April 30 8

May 1 - June 30 6

July 1 - August 31 4

September 1 - October 31 2

November 1 - November 30 I

December 1 - December 31 0

If an officer's tenure terminates, vacation shall be prorated at the rate of
calendar days from the anniversary date to the last day of active duty (exclusive
of vacation to be taken) to 365. In the event that an officer retires, resigns or is
terminated and has used more vacation time than he or she had accrued on a
pro-rata basis, a deduction will be made from the employee's final paycheck
for vacation pay that was paid but had not yet accrued at the time of
termination.

Officers will be granted vacation days to be used in one week blocks.
2.2

Vacations may not be carried over from one year to the next.
Vacations shall be scheduled according to seniority.
Officers will be permitted to move two (2) consecutive pass days that fall
immediately before or after their vacation to either the beginning or end of
their scheduled vacation. This will be irrespective of the total number of
consecutive days that result.
Holidays
In recognition of the fact that officers are likely to be required to work on
holidays, on the last payday in November each officer will be paid a day's
wages for each of the following 11 holidays:
New Years Day
Martin Luther King Jr.'s Birthday
Washington's Birthday
Easter
Memorial Day
July Fourth
Labor Day
Veterans Day
Thanksgiving
Christmas
Officer's Birthday

In the alternative to receiving such payment at the daily rate, each officer will
have the option, if he so chooses, of taking up to eleven (11) days off, provided
however, that all specific requests are subject to scheduling considerations.
Notice must be given to the Chief or, at his direction, to the officer in charge of
scheduling, at least two (2) weeks prior to exercising such option to take a day
off. The officer in charge of scheduling may, in his sole discretion, waive the
two (2) weeks notice. Overtime may be paid to cover holiday passes, provided,
however, that if the number of overtime hours as judged in the sole discretion
of the Joint Police Board, increases substantially, the Board may impose a limit

not to exceed five (5), on the number of days which may be taken off.
Major Holidays: In the event that an officer works a major holiday (here
defined as: New Year's Day, Easter, July 4th, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and
Christmas) the officer shall receive, compensation at one and one half pay plus
the option of an additional day off or additional one day's pay (as set forth in
the above paragraph).

2.3 Personal Days
One (1) personal day off will be given for officers having more than one (1) but

less than three (3) years service. After three (3) years of service, officers will
be given two (2) personal days off per calendar year. After five (5) years of
service, officers will be given three (3) personal days off per calendar year.
Notice must be given to the scheduling officer as early as possible. Time not
taken off will be compensated on the last pay day in November at regular
salary rates. Allowable time not used in a calendar year may not be carried
over.

In order to maintain adequate shift coverage on Thanksgiving Day, Christmas
Eve, Christmas Day, and New Year’s Eve requests for Personal Days for these
four (4) days must be submitted between August |“ and August 15" of the year

in which the day falls, and will be awarded by seniority.

2.4 Bereavement Leave

a. Upon the death of any member of an officer’s immediate family, said
officer shall be permitted three (3) days off with pay. Immediate family
is hereby defined as officer’s spouse, children, grandchildren, mother,
father, brother, sister, grandparents, mother-in-law, or father-in-law.
Such time off will be consecutive work days, which must include the
day of the funeral or memorial service. The officer must provide a
death notice or death certificate upon his return.

b. Upon notice of death of the following class of individuals police officer
will receive one (1) day with pay - the day of the funeral - for the
purpose of attending said funeral when the death of an officer’s uncle,

aunt, nephew, niece, brother-in-law, sister-in-law or grandparents-in-law
2.5

occurs, provided said officer attends the funeral. Such time off must
include the day of the funeral or memorial service. The officer must
provide a death notice or death certificate upon his return.

In unusual cases which are not definable but must be covered by
common sense, it’s within the province of the Chief of Police to grant

additional time off.

Compensatory Time
Full-time police officers shall have the option of taking compensatory time in

lieu of overtime pay, which shall be earned at the rate of one and a half hours of

compensatory time for each hour worked subject to the following conditions:

a.

Each officer shall be permitted to accumulate compensatory time off for
overtime, but shall not accumulate more than forty (40) compensatory
hours at any one time.

Scheduled vacations days, personal days and holiday passes have
priority over requested compensatory time

Compensatory time off shall begin to accumulate on January | of each
year through November 15" of each year, however, compensatory time
cannot be used after November 15" through the month of December.

Any accumulated, unused compensatory time held by an officer as of
November 15 of each calendar year shail be converted to paid overtime
and paid to the officer by the Joint Board in the first pay of December of
each year.

Compensatory time may only be used when it does not trigger overtime
opportunities.

A record of compensatory time accumulated and used shall be

kept by the Chief of Police, with hours being checked on a periodic

basis.
Section I. WORK WEEK —SCHEDULING - SHIFT ASSIGNMENTS
3.1 Work Week

The work week shall consist of seven consecutive days beginning 6:45 a.m. on

Monday.
3.2. Scheduling-Shift Assignments

Normally, officers will not be scheduled for more than forty (40) hours of work

during a work week. The work schedule will be posted at least one calendar year

in advance, but an officer's schedule may be changed to meet the operational

needs of the Police Department. When it is necessary to change an officer's

scheduled work hours, the Chief will attempt to give adequate notice. Officers

shall be scheduled for two consecutive days off per work week, where it does

not interfere with the operations of the Police Department.

1. Shift assignment shall be established on an annual basis.

N

Officers shall select their shift assignments by seniority.

Pass days will rotate forward.

af

All full-time officers will be scheduled based on a 28-day shift rotation.

Officers, by mutual agreement, may switch shifts with the prior

knowledge and approval of the Chief of Police. There will be no

limitation on the number of switches. Three-way switches are permitted

prior to posting of the final schedule.

6. In general, switches must be made before the final schedule is posted.

However, it is understood that circumstances may change, at the Chief’s

discretion, monthly switches may be made during the calendar year.

Three-way switches will not be allowed during the year.

7. If there is sufficient shift coverage, an officer may request to use a

holiday pass or comp time at any time prior to the start of the affected

shift.

8. Based on the operational needs of the department, the Chief of Police

will have discretion to deviate from this agreement.

i
Notwithstanding any other provisions in this Agreement, the scheduling of weekly shift
assignments of all full-time officers within the first three (3) years of full-time
employment shall be at the sole discretion of the Chief of Police without restriction of
any kind. Furthermore, notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement the
Chief of Police shall retain sole discretion to schedule School Resource Officers,

Lieutenants, Detectives and any other specialty position.
Section IV.

HEALTH BENEFITS

4.) Medical Benefits

a,

The Joint Police Board will provide major medical coverage for all full-time
officers and their dependents subject to changes imposed by the carrier. The
Police Board may change plans and/or carriers to “substantially comparable”
coverage, Substantially comparable coverage in this contract does not mean
equal or equivalent. The Union however, retains the right ta grieve the Joint
Police Board’s determination that the plan and/or carrier is “substantially
comparable.” When the Joint Police Board decides to change the plan, it will
provide the Union with details of the current plan and the new “substantially
comparable” plan. If the Union does not agree that a plan or carrier selected by
the Joint Police Board is “substantially comparable,” it will so state, in writing,
to the Joint Police Board within fourteen (14) calendar days of the plan and/or
provider being presented to the Union by the Joint Police Board, or such longer
period as mutually agreed to by the parties in writing. In that event, the Joint
Police Board may not unilaterally implement the proposed new plan and/or
insurance provider: however, it may immediately process the dispute before a
neutral arbitrator selected pursuant to the arbitration step of the grievance
procedure. The decision of the arbitrator on this “substantially comparable”
issue shall be issued within 45 calendar days of the Union’s written notice
contesting that the plan selected by the Joint Police Board is “substantially
comparable” and shall be final and binding and will determine if the Joint Police

Board is authorized to implement the new plan or provider.

All full-time police officers will contribute, on a cumulative basis, fifteen per
cent (15%) of the annual increases to hospitalization/surgical/major medical
costs above the 2010 rate at the applicable level of coverage (eg. Individual,
family, etc.) All such contributions shall be made by prorated monthly payroll

deductions.

Notification regarding change of status. In the event an officer’s family and

status changes in a way that would affect the cost that the Joint Police Board
4.2

pays for health insurance benefits, the officer will immediately notify the Joint
Police Board. In the event such notification is not made, the officer will be
personally responsible for the resulting cost differential, which will be withheld
from his pay over a suitable period of time as determined by the Joint Police

Board.

If the Joint Police Board determines that it is necessary it may require an officer
to summit to a physical scheduled by the Police Officer and paid for by the Joint
Police Board with a Joint Police Board selected physician. The results of this
physical will be released only to the police officer. Notice that said physical
took place will be given to the Joint Police Board and will certify that the Police
Officer is fit for duty.

Right to elect spouses’ coverage. An officer may elect to waive any and all
health coverage and receive fifty percent (50%) of the Board’s savings as salary
supplements pursuant to the provisions of the Northern Regional Police Force
Medical Election Plan, if he or she can demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
Joint Police Board and such terms and conditions imposed by the insurance
carrier, that he will be covered by a comparable or superior plan by the spouse’s
coverage. If the option to drop health coverage is elected, the officer may at any
time resume health coverage pravided by the Joint Police Board by notifying the
Chief and complying with the terms and conditions imposed by the insurance

carrier.

Dental Benefits
The dental insurance benefit existing in the 2010 to 2012 collective bargaining
agreement between the parties shall be continued in the 2013 ~ 2015 collective

bargaining agreement.
Section V.

SICK LEAVE

All full-time officers shall be entitled to receive 100% of their base pay for
absences due to routine illness and injuries of a short duration, including the

waiting period prior to becoming eligible for STD benefits.

Sick leave shall not be considered a privilege, but will be allowed only in the
event of personal illness or physical incapacity resulting from causes beyond the
officers control. Accordingly, sick leave is not an entitlement like vacation
leave, and it shall not be treated as such, Sick leave abuse is a serious
disciplinary offense which may subject the abuser to corrective action up to and

including dismissal.

A doctor's certificate or cogent medical explanation shall be presented by the

police officer to the Chief of Police in the following instances:

i) After two (2) consecutive days of sick leave

il) After two (2) sick leaves in any month

iii) After eight (8) sick leaves in any year.

iv) When an officer takes a sick leave for the next regularly scheduled shift
immediately following an overtime detail.

v) After an officer takes a sick leave in conjunction with other paid time off
or pass days more than two (2) times in a calendar year.

vi) For purposes of this section a sick leave will be defined as a sick day or
days uninterrupted by a day of work.

vii) A cogent medical explanation is one which comes from a competent
medical practitioner, who demonstrates knowledge of the essential
functions of the employee’s job, and who provide sufficient detail so that
a reasonable lay person can understand the asserted basis for the
absence. A conclusory statement that the employee was unable to report
to work due to illness will not be satisfactory. Cogent medical

explanations will be required for subsections (iii), (iv) and (v) above.
In the following instances, the officer will be subject to an administrative

review:

i) An officer who takes more than eight (8) sick leaves in any year.

ii) | Anofficer who takes sick leave in conjunction with other paid time off or
pass days more than two (2) times in a calendar year.

iii) An officer who takes sick leave for the next regularly scheduled shift
following an overtime detail and fails to provide a cogent medical
explanation.

iv) If, as aresult of this review, it is found that the officer has improperly
used sick time, they will forfeit their right to detail and private contract
overtime for the 6-month period immediately following the finding.

They will still be eligible for shift overtime.

An officer who takes sick leave for the regularly scheduled shift immediately
prior to a previously scheduled private contract overtime detai] will forfeit that

detail, and it will be re-assigned to another officer.

After an extended or severe illness, the Police Board may require certification

by a doctor that an officer is fit to return to work.

Nothwithstanding the above-referenced general rules, the Joint Police Board
may counsel and/or discipline employees, for sick leave abuse where
occurrences, evidence a pattern of abuse, Examples of such abuse may include,
but are not limited to, single day occurrences of sick leave and sick leave
occurring contemporaneously with other forms of time off, either paid or
unpaid. Moreover, an employee with a history of such utilization may be
required to justify any request to utilize sick leave by providing a cogent

medical explanation for the absence.
All full-time officers requesting sick leave payments shall be required to
complete and submit to the Chief of Police, the attached Sick Leave Request
form, immediately following the officers’ return to work, and prior to the end of

the payroll period.
Sick Leaye Use Verification

I hereby certify that on the date(s) of ,1
was unable to work due to personal illness or physical incapacity resulting from causes beyond
my control, as required for the appropriate use of sick leave under Section 4.2 of the Collective
Bargaining Agreement. I hereby certify and verify that the statement is true and correct. I
further understand that any false statements will result in disciplinary action up to and

including dismissal.

 

Name of Employee

 

Date
Section VI:

a.

DISABILITY BENEFITS

Provided a full-time police officer meets the policy eligibility requirements,
such full-time police officers shall be entitled to twenty-six-(26) weeks of short-
term disability coverage at 100% of base pay. The Joint Police Board shall be
responsible for procuring the short-term disability policy, but all coverage
decisions shall be made by a carrier and shall not be subject to the grievance

procedure.

Commencing on the day after short-term disability coverage terminates, an
officer shall be entitled to receive a long term disability benefit equal to sixty six
and two thirds percent (66.66%) of base pay. The Joint Police Board shall be
responsible for procuring the long-term disability policy, but all coverage
decisions shall be made by a carrier and shall not be subject to the grievance

procedure.

Full time police officers hired prior to January 1, 2013, shall be entitled to
receive a disability supplement equal to thirty three and one third percent
(33.33%) of the officers base pay for a period of up to ten (10) weeks from the
first day an officer begins receiving long term disability compensation. Police

officers hired after January 1, 2013 shall not be entitled to the supplement.

The employer’s only responsibility relative to short-term disability and long-
term disability coverage is to procure the policies themselves, and all coverage
decisions shall be made by the carrier and shall not be subject to the grievance
procedure, The Police Board may change plans and/or carriers to “substantially
comparable” coverage. Substantially comparable coverage in this contract does
not mean equal or equivalent. The Union however, retains the right to grieve
the Joint Police Board’s determination that the plan and/or carrier is
“substantially comparable.” When the Joint Police Board decides to change the
plan, it will provide the Union with details of the current plan and the new
“substantially comparable” plan. If the Union does not agree that a plan or
carrier selected by the Joint Police Board is “substantially comparable,” it will

so state, in writing, to the Joint Police Board within fourteen (14) calendar days

19
of the plan and/or provider being presented to the Union by the Joint Police
Board, or such longer period as mutually agreed to by the parties in writing. In
that event, the Joint Police Board may not unilaterally implement the proposed
new plan and/orinsurance provider; however, it may immediately process the
dispute before a neutral arbitrator selected pursuant to the arbitration step of the
grievance procedure. The decision of the arbitrator on this “substantially
comparable” issue shall be issued within 45 calendar days of the Union’s
written notice contesting that the plan selected by the Joint Police Board is
“substantially comparable” and shall be final and binding and will determine if

the Joint Police Board is authorized to implement the new plan or provider.

Any police officer hired prior to January 1, 2013 who is eligible for long term
disability benefits will remain eligible for health insurance and life insurance
coverage at the coverage level last received as an active employee for up to
sixty-two (62) weeks from the date the officer became eligible for long-term
disability benefits or the officer’s death whichever may occur first. Police
officers hired after January 1, 2013 who are eligible for long-term disability
benefits shall be entitled to maintain life insurance and health insurance benefits
for a period of fifty-two (52) weeks from the date the officer became eligible for
long-term disability benefits or the officer’s death whichever may occur first.

Officers will be responsible for paying any contributions toward the cost of

coverage that they would be required to pay as an active employee.

Eligibility for these insurance benefits will be subject to the restrictions imposed
by the insurance carriers and policies. If an officer has not returned to work at
the end of this fifty-two (52) or sixty-two (62) week period, he or she shall be
granted an honorable discharge from employment with the Department. In the
event that any officer recovers from disability and is medically cleared to return
to work as a full-time police officer with no restrictions and meets all
requirements of MPOETC and is recertified by the commission, he/she shall be

reinstated to full-time active status.

20
Any officer that receives long-term disability will not accrue, nor be eligible to
receive any additional benefits under the contract, including, but not limited to,
sick leave benefits, accrued personal time, uniform allowance, accrued vacation

and additional credit for service time towards retirement eligibility.

Any police officer whose base salary has been continued for periods of time
during which they are eligible to receive disability benefits must return to the
NRPD all such disability compensation so as not to receive more than their full

base salary.

21
Section VII.

a,

LIFE INSURANCE

Life insurance in the amount of $100,000 will be carried for each officer.

If an officer dies while an employee in good standing, the benefits of such
policy shall be paid according to the terms of the policy. In addition, all

department pay for a remainder of month shall be similarly paid over.

Officers who become eligible for long term disability benefits will remain
eligible for the existing life insurance coverage provided by the Joint Police
Board for either fifty-two (52) or sixty-two (62) weeks as specified in Section VI
(e) from the date they become eligible to receive long-term disability benefits,

The Joint Police Board shall be responsible for procuring the life insurance
policy, but all coverage decisions shall be made by a carrier and shall not be
subject to the grievance procedure. Eligibility for these insurance benefits will be
subject to the restrictions imposed by the insurance carriers and policies. The
existing term life insurance coverage provided to bargaining unit members shall
be covered as a “Conversion Privilege” as specified by the insurance carrier so
long as eligibility exists. Eligibility for insurance benefits will be determined by

the insurance policies and carriers.
Section VII. PENSION
All officers’ pension benefits shall be as set forth in the plan document titled
Amendment and Restatement to Pine/Marshall/Bradfordwoods Police Pension Trust

dated December 19, 1985, and all amendments thereto including the following:

Normal Retirement Eligibility/Final Monthly Average Salary
a. Eligibility
i. For full-time officers hired prior to January 1, 2013: Age 50 and
completion of 25 Years of Service.
ii. For full-time officers hired on or after January 1, 2013: Age 55
and completion of 25 Years of Service.
b. Amount of Benefit
i. For full-time officers hired prior to January 1, 2013; A monthly
benefit equal to 50% of Final Monthly Average Salary as defined

below.

Final Monthly Average Salary

"Final Monthly Average Salary" shall mean the average monthly salary earned by the
Participant and paid by the Employer during the final thirty-six (36) months of the
Participant's Employment. Salary shall include the Employee's Compensation to which
the Employee is entitled for the rendering of services in Employment but shall exclude
for this purpose any single sum or extraordinary payments made which are not directly
attributable to active Employment during the averaging period, including but not
limited to payment for accumulated sick leave, payment of a longevity bonus, or
payment of a back pay damage award.

Final Monthly Average Salary shall be calculated by taking into account only those
periods during which an Employee receives salary, as that term is defined in this
Section. Therefore, for example, the Final Monthly Average Salary for a Participant
who receives disability benefits from this Plan or who is voluntarily or involuntarily
serving in the United States armed forces during the final thirty-six (36) months of
Ageregate Service shall be based on the period during which the Employee last
received salary (as defined in the preceding paragraph) from the Employer.

Salary used to determine Final Monthly Average Salary shall be limited on an annual

basis to the amount specified for government plans in accordance with Code Section
401(a)(17), as adjusted under Code Section 415(d).

ii. For full-time officers hired on or after January 1, 2013: A

monthly benefit equal to 50% of Final Monthly Average Base

Salary over the final 36 months of employment.

23
Employee Contribution

iit,

As a condition of participation in the Police Pension Plan, each active
participant hired prior to January 1, 2013 must contribute 3.5 percent (3.5%) of
the participant’s annual compensation. Should the Police Pension Plan require
any contribution greater than three and five-tenths percent (3.5%) each active
participant will contribute that amount not to exceed five percent (5%).
Each active participant hired on or after January 1, 2013 must contribute 3.5
percent (3.5%) of the participant’s annual base salary compensation. Should the
Police Pension Plan require any contribution greater than three and five-tenths
percent (3.5%) each active participant will contribute that amount nat to exceed
five percent (5%).
The Beard shall reduce or eliminate the required participant contributions
provided all three (3) of the following requirements are satisfied:
L. The current actuarial study indicates that the condition of the
Plan is such that contributions may be reduced or eliminated;
zt Contributions by the Board are not required to keep the Plan
actuarially sound; and
3. Any reduction or elimination of contributions is authorized on an
annual basis by an ordinance or resolution by the Board.
In the event of a reduction or elimination of participant pensions
contributions in any one year below the rate of 3.5 percent (3.5%), then
the amount by which the participant contribution is reduced below 3.5
percent (3.5%) will be placed in a deferred compensation program
established pursuant to the regulations of Section 457 of the Internal

Revenue Code.

24
Section IX.
9.1

UNIFORM AND EQUIPMENT /CANINE CARE ALLOWANCE
Uniform and Equipment Allowance
Each officer included in this agreement, excluding officers in their first year,
shall receive an annual uniform and equipment allowance as follows:

2013-2015 $875.00
Newly hired officers, with hire dates from January 1 through June 30, shall
receive a one-half allowance in the following year. Newly hired officers, with
hire dates from July 1 through December 31, shall receive a one-quarter

allowance in the following year.

The officer will purchase such uniform and equipment from stores approved by
the Joint Police Force Board after consideration of the advice by the Chief of
Police. The approved stores will invoice the Joint Police Board directly. The
allowance, if unspent, does not carry over from year to year. Any uniforms or
equipment damaged in the line of duty will be replaced by the Joint Police
Board and excluded from the officer’s individual allowance.
STANDARD UNIFORM AND EQUIPMENT
See attached list.

Body armor will be purchased by the Joint Police Board in accordance with
normal wear and technological improvements of same. Body armor will be
replaced every five (5) years. If the body armor manufacturer dictates that
replacement occur on a different schedule, this policy could be reviewed by the
Joint Police Board. Officers shall purchase their own duty side arms, but the
Joint Police Board will pay for any or all maintenance, repair and ammo of duty
sidearms as required. Any changes in design, style, color or material must first

be approved by the Joint Police Board.

9.2 Canine Care Allowance

a. Officers given the assignment of housing, feeding, cleaning, handling,
maintaining, and being responsible for police dogs, if any, owned by
the Joint Police Board shall be provided with an additional five dollars
($5.00) per day, seven (7) days per week, representing payment for all
services required to be performed by the K-9 officer while off duty. The
employer will also provide for veterinary and food costs. The parties
(and the individual K-9 officers) agree that this additional compensation
is reasonable and sufficient for the amount of time spent housing,
feeding, cleaning, handling, maintaining and being responsible for a
canine while off duty. The K-9 officer shall only use the police dog to
perform the services as directed by the Joint Police Board and any

applicable K-9 Policy.

Nothing herein will be interpreted as restricting the Board’s exclusive
tight to maintain and/or eliminate the Board’s K-9 Program. The parties
agree and acknowledge that the police dog owned by the Board shall
always remain the property of the Board until the canine either retires or
the K-9 program is ended. If the K-9 program is eliminated, the Board,

in its sole discretion, may consider selling the canine to the K-9 officer.

26
X, QUALIFICATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
10.1 Training

All candidates for the position of officer will have the qualifications as set by
the Board in its sole discretion All full-time officers will be required to attend
the Police Academy for in-service training when required. Each officer is to
upgrade his police knowledge by attending classes at the Academy as required
by applicable law. All efforts will be made by the Joint Police Board so that
officers can attend the academy either as in-service courses or a prolonged

course as conditions exist and monies are available.

In those cases where an officer is sent to attend a course by the Police
Department, he will be paid at straight time. Payment for the above will be paid
in accordance with Fair Labor Standards Act, if such payment results in higher
pay.All training, with the exception of training conducted within Allegheny
County, must be pre-approved by the Joint Police Board.

To any place other than the Allegheny County Police Academy, an officer may
take a police unit, if available. If a unit is not available, the department will
reimburse for mileage. The officer will be paid for travel time from the police
station.
Residency
Within one (1) year after probationary period ends, officer must live within:

10 air miles east of the police area borders.

10 air miles west of the police area borders.

10 air mile south of the police area borders.

North of station to an east/west line at the I-79 Portersville Exit. (See

attached map).

Requests for variations from these residency boundaries will be reviewed at the

sole discretion of the Joint Police Board, on a case by case basis.

27
Section XI. DISPUTE RESOLUTION

11.1

11.3

Policy - It is the policy of the Joint Police Board and the police officers to
encourage a harmonious and cooperative relationship and to resolve grievances
in accordance with fair and orderly procedures. Should differences arise
between the Joint Police Board and the police officers as to the interpretation or
application of this Agreement and/or the Northern Regional Police Rules and

Regulations, such differences shall be resolved in the following manner:

Definition - A grievance is a dispute concerning the interpretation, application
or alleged violation of the expressed terms of this Agreement and/or disciplinary

provisions of the Northern Regional Police Rules and Regulations.

Grievance Procedure - A grievance must be filed within ten (10) calendar days
of the alleged incident or when an officer should have reasonably known about
the incident. The grievance must cite the specific Article and Section of this
Agreement and/or the Northern Regional Police Rules and Regulations that is
implicated and provide all available information and documentation supporting
the grievance. Requests and approvals of extensions of any of the applicable
deadlines contained within this Article shall be made in the grievance. A police
officer is entitled to select the Grievance Committee to represent hini/her during

all steps of the grievance procedure which shall be as follows:

Step 1 -A police officer with a grievance shall discuss it with the Chief of Police, who

shall attempt to resolve the grievance to the mutual satisfaction of the grievant and the

Joint Police Board within five (5) business days of its presentation. The Chief of Police

shall report his/her decision in writing to the grievant. If the grievant does not proceed

with his/her grievance to the second step within the time limits prescribed in the

following subsection and no written extension of time is granted, the grievance shall be

considered to have been satisfactorily resolved and/or withdrawn.

Step 2 - If the grievant and the Grievance Committee are not satisfied with the

disposition of the grievance after receiving a decision from the Chief of Police, and if

28
no decision is received within the time period prescribed in Step 1, they may submit a
written appeal to the Joint Police Board, or its designee. The written appeal must be
submitted within five (5) business days after receiving a decision at the first step or
when the first step decision is due. The Joint Police Board, or its designee, shall within
five (5) business days after receiving the appeal, meet with the grievant in an attempt to
resolve the grievance and shall give the grievant a written decision within five (5)
business days following the meeting. If the grievance is not pursued to the third step,
the grievance shall be considered to have been satisfactorily resolved and/or

withdrawn,

Step 3 - If the Grievance Committee is not satisfied with the disposition of the
grievance at the second step, or if no decision is received within the time period
prescribed in Step 2, it may be appealed to arbitration within five (5) business days after
receiving a decision at the second step or when the second step decision is due. A
request for arbitration may be initiated by the Grievance Committee serving upon the
Joint Police Board a notice in writing of an intent to proceed to arbitration. Upon
receipt of a notice requesting arbitration, the parties shall meet to select an Arbitrator.
If the parties cannot agree on the selection of a neutral Arbitrator, the parties shall
request a list of seven (7) local Arbitrators from the American Arbitrators Association,
who are approved by the National Academy of Arbitrators. The parties shall strike
names from the list of Arbitrators with the Police Board striking first until one (1) name
remains. Thereafter, the parties will alternate the right to strike first. The American
Arbitrators Association will be notified of the Arbitrator selected and the hearing shall
be held on a date and time and at a location mutually agreed upon by the Joint Police
Board and the Grievance Committee. The parties shall bear the expenses of preparing

and presenting their respective cases.

The Arbitrator shall be requested to issue a decision within thirty (30) calendar days
after conclusion of the arbitration hearing and the decision shall be final and binding on
the parties. The Arbitrator shall have no power or authority to make any decision
contrary to, nor inconsistent with, the terms of this Agreement or applicable law or
which otherwise operates to limit or interfere with the powers and responsibilities of the

Joint Police Board. Moreover, the Arbitrator shall be without the power to modify or

29
mitigate the level of discipline imposed by the Joint Police Board once the Arbitrator
has found that the police officer engaged in the conduct for which he/she is being
disciplined, unless the arbitrator determines, and prepares Findings of Fact which
demonstrate, the penalty to have been imposed in a manner that is arbitrary, capricious,

or discriminatory.

The time limits set forth in this grievance procedure shall, unless extended by mutual

written agreement by the parties, be considered to the highest degree, binding.

A grievance may be withdrawn by the Grievance Committee or grievant, in writing, at
any time and the withdrawal of any grievance shall not be prejudicial to the position

taken by the parties as they relate to that grievance or any future grievance.

Nothing in this Article shall preclude any individual grievant or group of grievants
from, at any time, presenting, grievances to the Joint Police Board and having them
adjusted without the intervention of the bargaining representative as long as the
adjustment is not inconsistent with the terms of this Agreement, then in effect, and
provided that the bargaining representative has been given an opportunity to be present

at such adjustment.

30
Section XII. REPRIMANDS, COMMENDATIONS, DISCIPLINARY ACTION

All reprimands/commendations will be submitted in duplicate by the Chief of Police
and/or acting officer. Said copies will be signed by officer being
reprimanded/commended. He retains one copy and the second copy will be placed in
police file.
An officer who receives any form of disciplinary action which is placed in the officer’s
permanent file, shall have that action removed from the file provided the officer
completes the specified time without any further disciplinary action against him/her.
The time schedule shall be as follows:

1. Verbal reprimand/supervisory note — six months;

2 Written reprimand — one year;

8. Suspension, | to 4 days — three years,

4 Suspensions of 5 or more days shall be retained in the file at the

discretion of the employer.

Disciplinary action shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Joint

Police Board.

34
Section XII]. MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

Section 1 - The Board reserves all rights and powers conferred upon it by the
Constitutions and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and of the United
States. It is understood and agreed that the Board, at its sound discretion, shal! have
and retain, solely and exclusively, in accordance with applicable laws, all managerial
responsibilities including, but not limited to, the right to manage all operations; to
determine the mission, purposes, objectives, policies, programs and functions, standards
of service, and organizational structure of the employer; to establish, amend or modify
its overall budget; to establish, change, combine or abolish job classifications or the job
content of any classification; to reprimand, suspend, discharge or otherwise relieve
employees from duty for the lack of work or other legitimate reasons; to hire, promote,
demote, transfer, layoff and recall employees to work; to schedule the workforce; to
expand, reduce, alter, combine or cease any job operation or service; to plan, direct,
control and regulate the utilization of technology and the use of machinery, equipment
and other property of the Board; to introduce new or improved research, development
and services; to determine and from time-to-time re-determine the methods, processes,
and materials to be employed by the Board; to determine the number and types of
employees required and to assign work to such employees in accordance with the
operational needs of the Board, and direct the workforce. Matters of inherent
managerial policy are reserved exclusively to the Employer.

Section 2 - The listing of specific management rights in this Agreement is not intended
to be, nor should it be considered restrictive or a waiver of any of the rights of
management not listed and not specifically surrendered herein whether or not such
rights have been exercised by the Board in the past. Further, all inherent managerial
rights, management functions and prerogatives which the Board has not expressly
modified or restricted by a specific provision of this Agreement are retained and vested

exclusively in the Board.

32
 

The term of this agreement shal] be from January 1, 2013 through December 31, 2015.
The Board reserves the right to reopen this collective bargaining agreement, pursuant to
the provisions of Act 111, relative to adding new municipal members to the Joint Police
Force.

IN WITNESS THEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be signed
in their respective names, by their respective authorized officers, as of the day and year first
above written,

Northem Regional Police Department Board Northern Rggional Police Association

    

 

 

33

  
Effective January 1, 2013 the longevity payment shall be as follows:

LONGEVITY COMPENSATION

Full Time Years

of Service on

Anniversary Date Compensation

1-6 -0-

7-10 $40.00 per year of service beginning with first year
11-19 $50.00 per year of service beginning with first year
20-25 $60.00 per year of service beginning with first year
26 and beyond $1,500 maximum

34
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING

 

Whereas, the Northern Regional Police Department Board (“NRPD”) and the Northem
Regional Police Association (“Union”) have engaged in collective bargaining for a successor
collective bargaining agreement;

Whereas, NRPD proposed certain language regarding sick leave abuse;

Whereas, the Union has indicated a willingness to accept the language proposed by
NRPD with certain changes;

NOW, THEREFORE, intending to be legally bound, the parties have agreed to resolve
this issue on the following terms:

1. Section V (g.) of the collective bargaining agreement will provide as follows:

g. Notwithstanding the above-referenced general miles, the Joint Police
Board may counsel and/or discipline employees for sick leave abuse where
occurrences evidence a pattern of abuse. Examples of such abuse may include,
but are not limited to, single day occurrences of sick leave and sick leave
occurring contemporaneously with other forms of time off, either paid or unpaid.
Moreover, an employee with a history of such utilization may be required to
justify any request to utilize sick leave by providing a cogent medical explanation
for the absence.

2. The parties agree that neither party may, in connection with grievance arbitration
or in any other proceeding, cite the language of NRPD’s original sick leave abuse proposal or in
any way refer to the fact that it was altered as evidence of the parties’ intent, as bargaining
history relevant to the interpretation of the collective bargaining agreement, or for any other
purpose whatsoever,

a This written Memorandum of Understanding contains the entire agreement
between the parties regarding this matter and supersedes any and all other agreements or
understandings, whether oral or written.

4, The parties affirm that they have read and understood this Memorandum of
Understanding, have had the opportunity to discuss it with legal counsel and are authorized to

ee Le hos¢-behalf tea j d.
nN FE My ,

a Regional Police Departrnént £
Date:_» (/-29-20/2

t Board
5
Liky 4 a
ern Regional Police Assotihtion]
ou. 11/29/) 2. iW

Sita t fees

      
  

   
     
      
   

 

   
 

 

 
