n

JUN\ 7 10\9

AGREEMENT
Between

THE BOROUGH OF BELLEVUE
A Home Rule Charter Municipality,
AND
THE ASSOCIATION OF BELLEVUE POLICE

(

)

January 1, 2019 through December 31, 2022

u
-1-

INDEX

,-

Article

)

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

Subject

Page

Agreement Page - History

Term of Agreement

4
4
4

Management

5

Grievance Procedure

5

Working Conditions

8
8
9
10
10
14
15
17
17
18
18
18
20
20
21
22
24
25
26
26
27
29
30
30

Recognition

Vacations
Holidays
Residency
Health Insurance Coverage
Accident Insurance Coverage
Pension Benefits
Life Insurance
Disability
Survivors' Benefits
False Arrest Insurance
Salaries
Overtime Compensation
Witness Fee Compensation
Call-Out/Call-Back Pay
Clothing Allowance
Personal Property of Officers
Sick Leave
Bereavement Leave
Legal Reimbursement
Police Schools
Longevity Pay
Statutory Protection
Non-Discrimination

-2-

Article

Subject

Page

29

Disciplinary Transfers/Just Cause

30
31

Scheduling

32
33
34

Dues Deductions

31
33
34
34
34
35
35
35

35
36
37
38

Off-Duty Protection

Police Association File Space
Military Leave
Equipment
Pay Period

Part-time Police Officers

36
36

Signature Page

38

Drop Program

)

-3-

AGREEMENT PAGE

HISTORY
THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into this ___

day of _____

_

2019, between the BOROUGH OF BELLEVUE, a Home Rule Charter Municipality,
hereinafter sometimes referred to as "Borough" and the ASSOCIATION OF BELLEVUE
POLICE, hereinafter referred to as "Police", was the result of collective bargaining under
Act No. 111 of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
All prior arbitration awards and agreements are herein incorporated by reference,
and the provisions of the awards and agreements shall be applicable except as
modified herein or by mutual written agreement between parties.

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION

Pursuant to Act 111 of 1968, the Borough of Bellevue, as employer, recognizes
the Association of Bellevue Police as the exclusive bargaining agent for all member of
the police department in compliance with the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board
Certification No. PF-R-90-W.

ARTICLE 2
TERM OF AGREEMENT

The term of this Agreement shall be four (4) years; that is, commencing January
1, 2019 and terminating December 31, 2022.
The Borough and the Association agree that this contract can be declared to be
null and void within thirty days upon approval and authorization to consolidate the
Bellevue Police Department with another department or departments. As such, the
terms and conditions of this contract should not be considered as a deterrent to
contemplating or finalizing any such consolidation of Police Services.

-4-

ARTICLE 3
MANAGEMENT
The parties hereto recognize and agree that the Borough of Bellevue, through its
Mayor and the Town Council of the Borough of Bellevue, shall direct the operation of
the Police Department as provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and the Ordinances and Resolutions of the Borough of Bellevue, except as expressly
provided by certain terms and conditions as set forth in this Agreement.
The operation of the Police Department includes, but is not limited to, the right to:
A.

Direct the Officers of the Borough of Bellevue Police Department.

B.
Hire, promote, transfer, assign and retain employees in positions, and to
suspend, demote, discharge or take disciplinary action against said Officers.
C.

Relieve employees from duties for legitimate reasons.

D.
Maintain the efficiency of the Borough of Bellevue in supplying Police
protection.
E.
Determine the methods, means, job classifications and personnel by
which such Police protection is to be supplied.

F.
Take whatever actions may be necessary to carry out the missions of the
Police Department of the Borough of Bellevue in situations of emergency.
G.
Determine reasonable schedules of work and duties and establish the
methods and processes by which such work and duties are performed.

ARTICLE 4
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
The parties hereto because of entering into this Agreement fully expect and
intend that the relationship between the parties hereto shall have been fully settled for
the term of the Collective Bargaining Agreement.
The parties agree hereby to exercise this Agreement in good faith and carry out
the terms and conditions of this Agreement in the same manner. In the event any
dispute arises out of the provisions of this Agreement or the interpretation thereof, such
disputes shall be settled by the following grievance and arbitration procedure:
A.

The purpose of the procedure is to secure, at the lowest possible level,

equitable solutions to the problems that may from time to time arise affecting the Police
Officers of the Borough. This would include the handling of complaints of Officers by the
Chief of Police when possible.

-5-

B.

Both parties agree that the proceedings will be kept as informal and

confidential as may be appropriate at any level of the procedure.

1.

Definitions
(a)

A grievance is hereby defined as (1) a complaint by an

Officer or group of Officers or entire shift of Officers or the entire Police force regarding
the meaning, interpretation or application of any provision of this Agreement.
Grievances may also be filed in all matters dealing with discipline and disputes involving
the Heart and Lung Act; and/or (2) the Borough or any of its agents acting in bad faith or
in an arbitrary or capricious manner contrary to this Agreement or established policies
or practices governing or affecting the Officers covered by this Collective Bargaining
Agreement, and/or (3) the filing by the Borough of a formal written reprimand.
In those areas in which the Borough has management rights, the exercise
of said rights without consultation with the members of Police force or their
representatives shall not constitute "acting in bad faith or in any arbitrary or capricious
manner."
(b)
An aggrieved person is a person(s) who may make a claim
including the entire Police force. This shall include the entire Police force in a group
grievance situation.

2.

Procedure - Time Limit

Since it is important that the grievance be processed as rapidly as
possible, the number of days indicated at each level should be considered as the
maximum and every effort should be made to expedite the process. In the event that the
Borough should not respond in the required amount of time, the grievance shall be
considered denied and the grievance may then be appealed to the next step of the
grievance process in accordance with the procedure set forth below. In the event that
the grievant or his representative does not file a grievance appeal at the next step in the
process in the specified amount of time after receiving a response at any level, it will be
construed by the Borough that the grievant and the Association agree and accept the
disposition of the matter formulated in the last response. The time limit specified,
however, may be extended to a specific number of days by mutual agreement in writing
by both parties.

-6-

3.

Grievance Levels
(a)

Level 1 - The grievance shall be filed in writing within thirty

(30) calendar days of its occurrence with the Chief of Police of the Borough and with the
Director of Administrative Services of the Borough of Bellevue. The Chief of Police shall
answer the grievance in writing within fifteen (15) calendar days of the filing of said
grievance. In the event the Chief of Police is absent due to illness, vacation, or other
similar reason, the grievance shall be filed with the Mayor, and the Mayor shall answer
the grievance in writing within fifteen (15) calendar days of the filing of said grievance.
(b)
Level 2 - In the event that the grievant or aggrieved person is
not satisfied with the disposition of the grievance at the first level, he shall file the
grievance in writing with the Mayor of the Borough within fifteen (15) calendar days of
the response at Level 1. The Mayor has fifteen (15) calendar days to respond, in writing,
to the grievant or aggrieved person. In the event the Mayor is absent, due to illness,
vacation, or other similar reason, the grievance shall be filed with the Acting Mayor of
the Borough, who shall have fifteen (15) calendar days to respond, in writing, to the
grievant or aggrieved person.
(c)

Level 3 - In the event that the grievant or aggrieved person is

not satisfied with the disposition at Level 2, he shall file within fifteen (15) calendar days
a grievance in writing with the Town Council of the Borough, which shall have fifteen
(15) calendar days after its next regular meeting to file an answer with the grievant or
aggrieved person in writing.
(d)

Level 4 - (1) In the event that the grievant or aggrieved

person is not satisfied with the disposition at Level 3, the grievant or aggrieved person,
or a duly authorized representative, shall within fifteen (15) calendar days of the last
response ask that said grievance be filed in writing with the Arbitrator selected by the
parties as hereinafter provided, for final disposition by said Arbitrator.
(2)

Cost for said Arbitrator, but not attorneys' fees for the

aggrieved person or the Borough of Bellevue, shall be divided equally between the
Borough and the grievant.
(3)
In the event the grievant or aggrieved person is not satisfied
with the disposition at Level 3, the grievant or aggrieved person or a duly authorized
representative shall ask for a list of arbitrators from the Pennsylvania Bureau of
Mediation and a striking procedure will commence so that an arbitrator shall be
selected. The Borough and the grievant shall alternate the option of who shall strike the
first name from the list of arbitrators selected.

-7-

ARTICLE 5
WORKING CONDITIONS
No Police Officer shall be required to work or use the facilities or equipment
provided by the Borough that are unsafe or hazardous or injurious to the Officer's
safety, well being and welfare. Such determination shall be made by the Officer in
charge of the shift if called to his attention by an Officer.

ARTICLE 6
VACATIONS

Police Officers of the Borough of Bellevue shall be entitled to the following
vacation benefits:

A.

Vacation earned and available to Police Officers shall be as follows:
1.

Continuous employment for
one (1) year or more but
less than five (5) years:

80 hours annually with pay

)
2.

Continuous employment for
five (5) years or more but
less than ten (10) years:

3.

120 hours annually with pay

Continuous employment for
ten (10) years or more but
less than twenty (20) years:

4.

Continuous employment for
twenty (20) years or more:

B.

160 hours annually with pay

200 hours annually with pay

1.
No more than two (2) weeks vacation will be taken in the months of June,
July and August. Vacations during the remaining months shall be scheduled at
the discretion of the Chief of Police and will be permitted to be scheduled from
January 1 through December 31.

-8-

2.

Two weeks of vacation shall be assigned with recognition of seniority.

After such two (2) weeks assignment, additional earned vacation time shall also
be assigned with recognition of seniority and rank.
3.

Vacation will be scheduled so that it will begin after the Officer's pass days

and end before his pass days, except during the months of June, July, August
and September, during which months vacation shall commence on a Sunday and
terminate on a Saturday.
4.

The vacation seniority selection list shall be posted on January 1st of each

contract year with all vacations being selected no later than March 31st of the
same contract year. The Chief of Police or other authorized persons may provide
latitude for special/unusual needs.
5.
After the selection of five (5) day multiples is exhausted, selection of single
days or more shall be permitted if selected in accordance with the vacation pick
schedule and does not conflict with any other provision of this article or any other
article.
6.
The Chief of Police has the ability and the authority and may make special
arrangements for the usage of vacation time by the Police Officers based on
special circumstances and situations.
7.

More than one Police Officer may be permitted to take vacation leave

during the same calendar period at those times when a Supervisor has not
scheduled a vacation and when such a vacation leave of the "second" Officer
does not result in the need for overtime to provide the necessary shift coverage.
ARTICLE 7
HOLIDAYS

Each Officer shall receive one hundred (100) paid holiday hours each year, if
employed throughout the year, which holidays shall be taken by December 31st of each
year.
-9-

For scheduling purposes, all one hundred (100) holiday hours will become
available for use at the beginning of each calendar year.

If an Officer files a written request with the Chief of Police for a paid holiday, his
request shall be answered in writing within fifteen (15) calendar days. If no response is
given by the Chief of Police within fifteen (15) calendars days, the request is considered
granted.

A maximum of three (3) paid holidays may be used by each Officer in one half
(1/2) day increments if such usage does not require the use of overtime by another
Officer to provide the required coverage on a shift as determined by the Shift
Supervisor.

Officers who terminate their employment with the Borough after reaching normal
retirement age and the required years of service, and who are not placed on disability
retirement will be paid for any unused holidays on a prorated basis of one per month for
that particular calendar year. Officers who have used more than their prorated allotment
will be docked for the number of days they are over.

Probationary Police Officers shall be entitled to one paid holiday for each month
of service to a maximum of one hundred (100) paid holiday hours per year.

ARTICLE 8
RESIDENCY

All Police Officers shall live within a thirty-five (35) air miles of the borders of the
Borough of Bellevue and only in the state of Pennsylvania.

ARTICLE 9
HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE

A

The Borough shall provide each employee the option of the Highmark MBS
PPO Blue 01500 Plan or the UPMC MBS PPO Q1500 plan, a high
deductible-health insurance plan that has no patient co-pays provided,
however, that the Borough shall also self-insure all applicable plan
deductibles and cause such deductibles to be promptly paid in full.
- 10 -

Effective January 1, 2019 each covered employee shall contribute seven and
one-half percent (7.5%) of the premium cost for the applicable level of coverage
selected and starting July 1, 2019 the employee contribution will increase to eight
percent (8%) of the premium cost for the applicable level of coverage selected.
Effective January 1, 2020, each covered employee shall annually contribute eight and
one-half percent (8.5%) of the premium cost for the applicable level of coverage
selected. Effective January 1, 2021, each covered employee shall annually contribute
nine percent (9%) of the premium cost for the applicable level of coverage selected.
Effective January 1, 2022, each covered employee shall annually contribute ten percent
(10%) of the premium cost for the applicable level of coverage selected.
Employee contributions to premium shall be contingent upon continued subscription by
the Borough to a health-insurance plan that has no patient co-pays and for which the
Borough self-insures all applicable plan deductibles. Employee contributions to health
care insurance premiums shall be made bi-weekly, on a pro rata basis, by means of
pre-tax payroll (IRC Section 125) deductions.

The Borough retains the right to change plans or carriers for the purposes of
decreasing costs or containing cost increased provided, however, the overall level of
benefits does not diminish and provided, further, that written notice, which shall describe
the proposed new plan and identify and proposed new carrier, is given to the Union in
advance of such change. The Union retains the right to challenge any proposed
material change in coverage through the grievance arbitration procedure.

If the employer receives notice or information indicating that its health care plan
costs will subject the plan to the Affordable Care Act's "Cadillac Tax" excise tax, the
employer will give the Union written notice of that fact and the parties will immediately
negotiate changes in the plan design, plan and/or plan carrier in order to avoid the
imposition of the tax. If no agreement is reached within fourteen (14) days of the
employer's written notice to the Union regarding this issue, then the parties will proceed
to an expedited interest arbitration proceeding in accordance with Act 111. The sole
purpose for that expedited arbitration proceeding will be for the arbitration panel to
modify the plan, plan design and/or plan carrier in order to eliminate the exposure to the
Cadillac Tax. The decision of the arbitration panel on this issue shall be issued within
thirty (30) calendar days of appointment of the neutral arbitrator.

- 11 -

B.
The Employer agrees to pay the full premium for each regular full-time
employee and for the employee's dependents for the Borough's Blue Cross/Blue Shield
High Option Dental care plan or a comparable plan from another provider.

C.

The Borough agrees to pay the full premium for each regular full-time

employee and for the employee's dependents for the Borough's Vision Care plan
offered through the Municipal Benefits Services (MBS) program or a comparable plan
form another provider.

D.
All obligations of the Borough to make deposits to a Health
Reimbursement Account (HRA), referenced in Paragraphs E, F, G and H, will be
suspended effective January 2013, or such earlier time as the Borough may convert to
the Highmark PPO Blue Q1500 plan. Any unused amounts remaining in the Officers'
accounts will be retained and frozen. If the borough resumes or maintains health
insurance coverage for the officer which requires payment by the officers of a
deductible, the subject provisions will be reinstated.

E.
The Borough shall arrange for a Health Reimbursement Account (HRA)
for each Officer so that the employee may access these funds for payment of medical
expenses incurred by the Officer, his/her spouse or dependents in accordance with
HRA rules and regulations.

F.
The Borough will deposit the following sums into the HRA account for
each Officer on January 1st of each year that this contract is in effect beginning in 2007
as identified herein:

Officers with "Single" coverage

$100.00

Officers with "Husband & Wife"
"Parent & Child(ren)" & "Family" coverage

$500.00

G.
Officers may only utilize reimbursement for actual medical expenses
incurred by the Officer, his/her spouse or dependents in accordance with HRA rules and
regulations. Any unused amounts remaining in the account upon the Officer's retirement
will be retained and frozen. The retired Officers may access these amounts during their
retirement in order to meet actual medical expenses incurred by the retired Officer,
his/her spouse or dependents in accordance with HRA rules and regulations.
- 12 -

H.
Effective January 1, 2005 - for Officers hired pre 1981 the Borough will
extend HRA payments into said Officers' retirement for a period of 10 years after date of
retirement, or until Medicare eligibility, whichever comes first.
I.
Any Officer who does not accept coverage through the Borough will so
indicate on forms provided by Blue Cross, Municipal Employers Insurance Trust, or the
Borough. An Officer who does not accept coverage because he/she is covered through
a spouse's plan shall be entitled to a payment of $300.00 per month payable through
the Borough's accounts payable system.
J.
Officers who do not accept coverage through the Borough may re-enroll
only during open enrollment periods in December of each year to be entitled to
coverage for the following year. Special provisions will be made for an employee who
has a significant change in status such as a spouse who dies, a divorce, a marriage,
child birth, or such other major change during the calendar year in which they have
opted to decline insurance coverage, subject to COBRA regulations.
K.
Retirees shall, at their option, be covered with the Borough's Highmark
PPO Blue Q1500 medical plan with the same terms and conditions as covered
employees or a comparable plan from a new carrier. Retirees shall make arrangements
with the Borough to make their payment contribution on a monthly basis. The Borough
of Bellevue shall assume and pay the full premium charges during the term of this
Agreement for maintenance in force for each retired Officer and his family for the
Borough's PPO Blue prevailing medical plan or a comparable plan from a new carrier
from the time that said Officer retires at age 55 or older until he is eligible for Medicare
coverage under the Social Security program, at which time said Officer shall apply for
Medicare coverage and will no longer be covered under the Borough's plan. In the
event of an Officer's spouse becomes eligible for Medicare as of her own right, then the
Officer shall so advise the Borough so that the Borough's coverage will apply only to the
Officer.
L.
Retirees shall, at their option, be covered with the Borough's Blue
Cross/Blue Shield High Option dental plan or a comparable plan from a new carrier. The
Borough of Bellevue shall assume and pay the full premium charges during the term of
this agreement for maintaining in force for each retired Officer and his family for the
Borough's Blue Cross/Blue Shield High Option dental plan or a comparable plan from a
new carrier from the time that the said Officer retires at age 55 or older until he reaches
the age of 65.

J

M.
The Borough of Bellevue shall pay all the premiums during the term of this
Agreement for maintenance in force for each retired Officer and his family, for the vision
care plan provided by Municipal Employers Insurance Trust or a comparable plan from
a new carrier from the time that said Officer retires at age 55 or older until he reaches
the age of 65.
- 13 -

N.
With respect to any health insurance and major medical coverage, and
dental program coverage, and vision care coverage, the Borough of Bellevue shall have
the right to change insurance carriers to obtain the least costly programs and/or
comparable plans from another provider so long as the coverage provided is
comparable in nature to the coverage presently provided and the coverage presently
provided are not reduced.

0.
In the event a Police Officer has to retire on disability retirement his/her
insurance will continue to be provided by the Employer for two years after the disability
retirement. After the two years of benefits they will discontinue until the retired Officer
reaches the age of 55, at which time the benefits will be reinstated until the age of 65.
The Officer must be vested in order to be eligible to receive benefits for the two years
after the disability retirement.

P. Annexed hereto for information purposes as Exhibit "A" are the provisions of
the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 477, as amended, 53 P.S. ยง 637, with respect to rights
and benefits of Officers for injuries sustained while on duty.

ARTICLE 10
ACCIDENT INSURANCE COVERAGE

A.
The Borough will provide Health and Accident Insurance coverage for all
Police Officers, but not the families of Officers, under the same terms and conditions of
the existing coverage, except that the weekly benefits for a period of twenty-six (26)
weeks, after the seven (7) day waiting period, shall be at the rate of sixty percent (60%)
of employees pay per week. The employee will pay fifty percent (50%) of the premium
and the Employer will pay the remainder of the premium of fifty percent (50%). In the
event an Officer is hospitalized, the waiting period terminates upon his hospitalization.

B.
With respect to any Police Officer injured while self-employed or in the
employ of another person, firm or corporation, said Police Officer is subject to the
provisions of the Borough's Accident Insurance policy and the determination of the
insurance company as to eligibility for benefits shall be final.

- 14 -

ARTICLE 11
PENSION BENEFITS

The parties hereto agree that the present pension program as prescribed by
applicable State law (Act 600 and amendments) and Borough Ordinances shall
continue in full force and effect except as modified herein.

A.
Parties further agree that pension rights shall vest after twelve (12) years
of continuous services.

B. Subject to and consistent with the limitations imposed by the statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, each police officer shall receive an
additional $100.00 per month for each completed year of service in excess of
twenty-five (25) years up to a maximum of $500.00 per month after thirty (30)
years of service.
C.
In addition to monthly pension or retirement allowances or increments,
each person receiving retirement benefits shall receive annual cost of living increases
equal to the percentage increases in the Consumer Price Index (CPI-W-Working
Wage Earners), but not more than three percent (3%) a year, from the year in which the
member last worked, provided, however, that in no case shall the total pension benefits
exceed seventy-five percent (75%) of the compensation for computing retirement
benefits or thirty percent (30%) of such compensation in total cost of living increases,
whichever is lesser.

J

D.
In addition to the pension benefits heretofore provided, each Police
Officer, regardless of date of hire, shall be entitled to receive any and all benefits that
are required, mandated, and allowable by Act 600 as amended and specifically as
amended by Act 30 of 2002. It is recognized that these statutes mandate certain
benefits for the surviving spouse and/or child/children of deceased Officers. It is also
recognized that these statutes give the surviving spouse/child/children of Officers who
die prior to superannuation but after achieving service necessary for vesting, the option
of taking a return of contributions with interest or a percentage of the deferred vested
benefit. For only those Officers hired prior to December 30, 2002 shall be entitled to the
optional widows benefit consistent with the Amendment of Agreement executed by the
parties on that date, said Officers are entitled to the optional widow's benefit established
in the prior collective bargaining Agreement. Under this provision, the widow of any
- 15 -

Officer that dies prior to reaching superannuation shall have the option of accepting any
available survivor's benefits pursuant to Act 600, as amended by Act 30, or all of the
following benefits as established under the prior collective bargaining Agreement. (1) A
full refund of the Officers contributions with interest; (2) A survivorship benefit equal to
50% of the maximum benefit that would have been payable to said Officer if fully retired
at the time of death, and (3) said benefit shall be payable only until such time as the
widow reaches age 62.

E.
During each year of the Agreement the Borough will have an actuarial
study performed to see if the employee contributions to the Police Pension Plan can be
reduced or eliminated without harming the fund's assets and stability.

F.

The above actuarial studies shall be deemed to be an expense of the

Police Pension Plan fund and shall be paid for from the pension fund at no cost to either
the Association of Bellevue Police or the Borough of Bellevue.

G.
The Association of Bellevue Police shall have the right to select one of
their members to attend all the meetings of the Borough of Bellevue Police Pension
Plan Committee and that said member shall be notified of all transactions involving the
Police Pension Plan as they occur, and that said member shall be furnished any and all
Ordinances, present and future, pertaining to the Police Pension Plan.
The Police Officer selected by the members of the Association of Bellevue Police
shall be a member of the Borough of Bellevue Police Pension Plan Committee, which
Committee will periodically review Police Pension Plan matters and make
recommendations to Council. The review of Police pension matters will include, but will
be limited to, the review by other companies providing Police Pension Plan services for
the purpose of determining whether the benefits provided are available at less cost or
whether more benefits may be obtained at the same cost. The commitment to review
the said Police Pension Plan does not commit Council to incur any expense in having
these reviews made.

H.
The Borough shall amend its pension Ordinance to incorporate an
actuarially reduced early retirement benefits for Officers who terminate employment with
twenty (20) or more years of service but prior to the completion of superannuation
retirement age and service requirements in accordance with the provisions of Act 24 (53
P.S. & 771 (i).

- 16 -

ARTICLE 12
LIFE INSURANCE

A.
Effective May 1, 2016 the Borough of Bellevue shall provide a life
insurance policy for each Officer while employed by the Borough in the amount of
$100,000.00 with double indemnity coverage.

B.
The Borough of Bellevue shall escrow the sum of $3,000 upon the
retirement of any Police Officer to be paid to his estate upon his death. A certificate
shall be provided to the Police Officer to that effect within one month of his retirement.

ARTICLE13
DISABILITY

A.
Disability retirement benefits shall be provided consistent with the terms
and provisions of Act 600, as amended by Act 30. With regards to an Officers off of
work due to work related disability, the Association recognizes the Borough's right to
require the injured Officer to provide medical reports concerning his/her condition at
reasonable intervals. The Borough shall have the right to require the disabled Officer to
attend Independent Medical Examinations not more than once every four (4) months.
The cost of the IME shall be borne by the Borough. In the event the Borough
determines that Heart and Lung Act Benefits should be terminated or suspended, it
shall provide notice to the Officer. If the Officer disagrees, he/she shall have the right to
submit the dispute for resolution through the grievance arbitration procedure, which may
be expedited at the Borough's request in accordance with the expedited arbitration
procedure of the American Arbitration Association. Selection of the grievance procedure
shall constitute a waiver of the Officer's right to Local Agency Hearing.

B.
It is agreed that for injuries sustained by each Officer while off duty, his
disability shall be as provided in Article 10 of this Agreement.

- 17 -

ARTICLE 14
SURVIVORS' BENEFITS

In the event any Officer dies prior to retirement, his survivors, including his
widow, shall receive those benefits as more particularly set forth under Article 11,
Section D, hereof in accordance with Act 600 as amended.
In the event an Officer dies after retirement, his survivors, including his widow,
shall have such rights as set forth in the Police Pension Plan and in accordance with the
option he selected at time of retirement.
ARTICLE 15
FALSE ARREST INSURANCE

The Borough agrees that it will assume and pay all premiums charged during the
life of this Agreement for the maintaining in force of false arrest, slander, assault, and
personal injury insurance in the amount of $500,000.00 for each Officer, with a policy
coverage limit of $1,000,000.00 for any one occurrence.

ARTICLE 16
SALARIES

Salaries of the Police Officers of the Borough of Bellevue shall be as follows
during the term of this Agreement:

A

Lieutenants shall be paid at the rate as set forth herein.
Effective Date

Hourly Rate

1/1/19

$39.95

7/1/19

$40.55

1/1/20

$41.16

7/1/20

$41.78

1/1/21

$42.82

1/1/22

$43.89

- 18 -

B.

C.

D.

Sergeants shall be paid at the rate as set forth herein.
Effective Date

Hourly Rate

1/1/19

$38.36

7/1/19

$38.94

1/1/20

$39.52

7/1/20

$40.11

1/1/21

$41.12

1/1/22

$42.14

Police Officer (fifth year) shall be paid at the rate as set forth herein.
Effective Date

Hourly Rate

1/1/19

$36.73

7/1/19

$37.28

1/1/20

$37.84

7/1/20

$38.41

1/1/21

$39.37

1/1/22

$40.35

Probationary Police Officers:

(i) Officers shall be paid annually and hourly at seventy percent
(70%) of the rate set forth above in paragraph C above for Police Officers for the
first year of employment, and shall be paid annually and hourly at eighty percent
(80%) of the rate set forth above in paragraph C for Police Officers for the
second year of employment, and shall be paid annually and hourly at eighty five
percent (85%) of the rate set forth above in paragraph C for Police Officers for
the third year of employment, and shall be paid annually and hourly at ninety-five
(95%)of the rate set forth above in paragraph C for Police Officers for the fourth
year of employment.
(ii) Officers shall reach one hundred percent (100%) of the Police
Officer rate of pay at the start of their fifth year.
E.
In the event a supervisor is not on duty, the senior Police Officer on that
shift shall be compensated at the rate of compensation equal to that of the next highest
rank.
- 19 -

ARTICLE 17
OVERTIME COMPENSATION

The standard workweek of a full-time presently employed Police Officer,
Sergeant and Lieutenant shall consist of a forty-hour (40) workweek. For each hour over
forty (40) hours, each Police Officer, Sergeant and Lieutenant shall receive pay at a rate
of time and one half of the normal hourly rate. All predictable overtime shall be
distributed on the basis of rotation according to seniority.
If a Police Officer, Sergeant or Lieutenant is passed over inadvertently and not
because of a reason attributable to him, he shall be given priority on the next available
overtime work.

If a Police Officer, Sergeant or Lieutenant is passed over intentionally, that is, the
call-out procedure is intentionally violated, then that Officer shall be compensated the
same amount paid to the Police officer, Sergeant or Lieutenant who was called out in
his place. Whether the act of passing over was intentional will be determined through
the grievance procedure, and the Police Officer, Sergeant or Lieutenant alleging the
intentional pass over has the burden of proving the pass over was intentional.
ARTICLE 18
WITNESS FEE COMPENSATION

In the event a Police Officer, Sergeant, or Lieutenant is required and a subpoena
is issued to the officer making his/her appearance mandatory to attend court in the role
of prosecution witness, in any criminal or statutory case in a court of record, the Officer
shall receive the following compensation:
1. District/ Magistrate's Court- The Lieutenant, Sergeant or Officer shall receive
the greater of two (2) hours minimum or actual time spent to be paid at the officer's
current straight pay rate.
2.Statutory/Summary Appeal Court- The Lieutenant, Sergeant or Officer shall
receive the greater of four (4) hours minimum or actual time spent to be paid at the
officer's current straight pay rate.

- 20 -

3.Federal Court, Court of Common Pleas, 302 Hearing - The Lieutenant,
Sergeant or Officer shall receive the greater of four (4) hours minimum or actual time
spent to be paid at the rate of one and one-half (1.5) times the officer's current pay rate.

In addition, each officer shall retain his/her witness fee and shall receive $10.00
per day to cover parking and luncheon costs. The Officer may, at his option, elect to
have this attendance considered as a regular workday. The Officer may only utilize this
option for court appearances that are scheduled the same day as the workday and
when it does not create the need for overtime. This option is for the Officers working the
night turn shift only. The Officer shall obtain permission from their shift supervisor. The
Officer agrees that the Chief of Police or shift supervisor may deny the Officer this
option at anytime in the event of a call off or the need for additional manpower is
required.

All reasonable efforts will be exerted by the Borough to avoid such Officer's
attendance as such witness on an off-duty day of such Officer.

ARTICLE 19
CALL-OUT/CALL-BACK PAY

Each Police Officer, Sergeant or Lieutenant called to commence his shift prior to
the regular starting time of the shift shall be paid for the hours worked.

When a Police Officer, Sergeant or Lieutenant has been discharged and relieved
from duty for the day and is called back to duty due to an emergency or other
circumstances, the Police Officer's, Sergeant's or Lieutenant's call-back time shall be for
a minimum of four (4) hours with time and one half to be paid for such call-back time,
which time shall not be included in calculating overtime pay.

When a Police Officer, Sergeant or Lieutenant having completed a full shift is
required to work another eight hours (8) shift, back to back, he shall be compensated at
a rate equal to two and one half (2 1/2) times his applicable hourly rate; provided,
however that the Officer responsible for calling the overtime list (list of Officers
maintained on a rotational and seniority basis) refuses or fails to call the Officers on said
list. If the Officer responsible for calling the list calls and after exhausting the same is
unable to obtain an Officer to come out, then the Police Officer, Sergeant or Lieutenant
- 21 -

required to work a second consecutive shift shall be compensated only at the applicable
hourly rate, time and one half.

ARTICLE 20
CLOTHING ALLOWANCE

A. The standard uniform is hereby defined as:
1 Uniform cap w/ summer
& winter cover

1 pair Handcuffs
1 Handcuff Case

1 Cold Weather Cap

1 Double Magazine or Double Speed Loader Case

1 Cap Strap

1 Holster

1 Cap Badge

1 Duty Belt

1 Helmet, Z-90 Specification

1 Garrison Belt

5 Summer (short sleeve) Shirts

1 Baton Ring or Expandable Baton Holder

5 Winter (long sleeve) Shirts

1 Night Stick or Expandable Baton

2 Neck Ties

1 Whistle, Chain, Rubber Cover

1 Tie Tack

1 Pair Collar Insignia

5 Pair Trousers

3 Name Tags

1 Light Weight Jacket w/ Liner

3 Badges

1 Winter Jacket/Leather Jacket

2 Police Patches per Shirt and Jacket

1 Pullover Sweater

1 Chemical Spray and Case
(for those authorized to use)

1 pair White Traffic Gloves

1 Radio Holder

1 pair Black cold weather Gloves 1 Key Holder
1 pair Black protective Gloves

1 Maglight Rechargeable "C" cell Flashlight

1 pair Black Uniform Shoes

1 Rechargeable Min-Flashlight with Holder

1 Pair Insulated Leather

1 Raincoat

Uniform Boots

Ammunition Change every six (6) months

* Soft Body Armor - "Threat Level" to be determined by the Chief of Police. Officers
shall purchase their own side arm (duty weapons).
- 22 -

B.
Any change in the design, style, color or material of the uniform beyond
that noted in Section G below must first be approved by the Town Council of the
Borough of Bellevue.
C.
Effective January 1, 2019, the uniform allowance for each officer shall be
eight hundred fifty dollars ($850.00). In the year in which the officer is required to
replace his/her bullet proof vest in accordance with the manufacturer's warranty, the
officer shall be able to carry over up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) of the
previous year's allowance for this purpose.

This allowance shall be either a voucher or purchase order with each Officer
having the right to purchase the approved items directly through the vender.

D.
Prior to an Officer using the Uniform Allowance to replace any article of
the standard uniform as identified above, the Officer shall provide notification to the
Police Chief that the item is being replaced and shall identify the need for the
replacement.

E.

New Officers shall be provided with the entire department uniform. New

Officer will not receive a uniform allowance until January 1st after their first anniversary
date. Newly hired Officers will not have the option of a leather jacket with their initial
uniform but may purchase a leather jacket with a subsequent annual uniform allowance.

F.
Officers will use the Standard Uniform as a guideline to what items may be
purchased with the uniform allowance in balancing the needs of uniformity and comfort
of the individual Officer.
G.
Police soft body armor will be replaced at the Borough's expense at the
recommended manufacturer's expiration date. Each Officer may select the
manufacturer, style and body armor options of the soft body armor. The Borough will
spend a maximum of six hundred fifty dollars ($650) toward the cost of said body armor
for each officer. Any amount in excess of six hundred fifty dollars ($650) shall be paid by
the officer making the purchase who may, at his/her option, apply any balance of his/her
uniform allowance to such excess.

- 23 -

Every officer must wear soft body armor while on active duty provided that the
Chief of Police may promulgate regulations waiving the mandatory wear requirements
consistent with maximum safety of the Officer.

H.
Officers will wear summer and winter uniforms on the dates specified in
Chapter 36, section 36.02 of the Bellevue Police Department Handbook of Laws,
Ordinances, Policy and Procedure. Officers will also fit duty belts from the Standard
Uniform list, at a minimum, with; one (1) holster, one (1) handcuff case, one (1) double
magazine or speed loader case and one (1) radio holder or clip. Other duty belt items
listed in the Standard Uniform may be worn at the individual Officer's discretion and
comfort.

I.
Jackets, raincoats and sweaters may be worn by an Officer in appropriate
weather at the discretion and comfort of the individual Officer, except that the Chief of
Police may require specific uniform for special events or circumstances. Sweaters may
only be worn with winter uniforms.
J.
Alteration to any uniform shirts may only be performed at the time of
purchasing the uniform shirts and is to be paid from the uniform allowance.

ARTICLE 21
PERSONAL PROPERTY OF OFFICERS

The Borough will provide, pay for, and/or reimburse each Officer who, in the line
of duty, has any items of personal property damaged, stolen or destroyed. The payment
shall be made within a reasonable period of time after the Borough has been furnished
an estimate of the value of the item(s) in question, the return of the damaged, stolen or
destroyed item if at all possible and report from the Officer as to what caused the
damage, theft or destruction of said item of personal property. The Borough shall make
said payment within twenty (20) days after the next regular Town Council meeting
following receipt of notification of such loss.

Damage or destruction to personal property must have resulted from physical
activity on the part of the Police Officer.

This article is not applicable to those items damaged or destroyed as a result of
ordinary wear and tear.
- 24-

ARTICLE 22
SICK LEAVE

A

Each Officer shall receive one hundred hours (100 hours) of sick time per
year. Each Officer may accumulate an unlimited amount of sick time to be paid upon
retirement only.
B.
An Officer off sick must call in a minimum of two (2) hours prior to the start
of his shift. The Officer in charge will check on an Officer on the second day such
Officer is sick.

C.
All sick days are at full pay; however, in the event any of said accumulated
days, after the first seven (7) days, are applied to an off-duty injury, accident or illness
and the Borough pays the Officer full pay for every accumulated sick day, said Police
Officer shall pay over to the Borough all benefits due him under the Health and Accident
Insurance Policy.
D.
In the event an Officer is injured off duty, he may apply as many of his
accumulated sick days as he wished to a disability period resulting from said injury.
E.
Each Officer shall receive credit for the sick days he has accumulated to
the date of this Agreement, and this Agreement shall not affect those sick days to which
the Officer is presently entitled.

F.

On or before February 1st of each year, the Borough shall provide to each

Police Officer a report of the number of sick days said Officer has accumulated to
December 31st of the prior year. In the event any Officer wished to dispute the report,
he shall do so in writing on or before March 1st of each year. In the event the Director of
Administrative Services is not notified in writing as to any dispute by March 1st of each
year, it shall be conclusively presumed that the report is accurate.

- 25 -

G.
Any Officer who retires shall receive twenty dollars ($20.00) per day for
each day of accumulated unused sick days. In the event of DROP participation by an
Officer, the buy-back by the Borough of accumulated unused sick days under Section G
shall occur on the effective date of the DROP election by the Officer
ARTICLE 23
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

A

Upon the death of any member of a Police Officer's immediate family, said

Officer shall be permitted forty (40) hours off with pay, including regular pass days.
Immediate family hereby defined as Officer's spouse, children, mother, father, brother or
sister.

B.
An Officer will receive thirty (30) hours off with pay, including regular pass
days, for the death of a grandchild, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law or sisterin-law.
C.
An Officer will receive ten (10) hours off with pay - the day of the funeral for the purpose of attending said funeral when the death of an Officer's uncle, aunt,
nephew, niece, grandparents, grandparents-in-law or cousin occurs, provided said
Officer attends the funeral.

D.
Special circumstances may arise where an Officer may require additional
bereavement time. Special requests may be made to the Chief of Police for
consideration of special requests and the Chief will have the authority to grant up to, but
not more than forty (40) additional hours of bereavement leave by utilizing vacation or
holiday benefits.

ARTICLE 24
LEGAL REIMBURSEMENT

)

The Borough shall defend any Officer in connection with any cost of litigation
arising out of any action taken in regard to any Officer's performance in the line of duty,
while on duty; provided, however, that in those instances where there is no insurance
coverage, the Borough shall provide counsel authorized by the Town Council of the
Borough for such defense and take such other action as it is necessary to properly
defend said action; provided, further, that the Borough shall not be liable for any verdict,
- 26 -

judgment or award rendered against said Officer, nor shall the Borough be deemed as
guarantor of a decision in favor of said Officer. The Borough shall not be required to
defend any intentional tort or criminal conduct on the part of the Officer, but the
foregoing shall apply where such Officer is subsequently successful in disproving such
allegations.

ARTICLE 25
POLICE SCHOOL

Each Police Officer, after his first two years of continuous employment, must be
offered the opportunity to complete two (2) advance Police education courses each
year. A currently employed Officer shall be designated by the Lieutenants, Sergeants
and Police Officers as the Education Officer. The Education Officer shall receive all
notices of Police training courses being offered at location within Allegheny County.

Assignments to such course shall be made by the Mayor upon recommendation
of the Chief of Police in consultation with the Education Officer and concurred in by the
Public Safety Committee of Council. The Mayor, the Chief of Police and the Education
Officer shall meet at least once each quarter to review and evaluate the course being
offered in order to determine the need for training of Officers and the applicability of
courses being offered. This review and evaluation of training options shall include
computer-based training materials, on-line training sessions and video recording
sessions.

All tuition charges for such instruction shall be paid in full by the Borough.

When an Officer attends a school that has been approved as per the provisions
hereof, he shall receive as reimbursement for expenses the sum of five dollars ($5.00)
per day, which shall be paid in advance of his attendance and which sum will
compensate him for expenses incurred.

In the event the Officer fails to complete the full term of the school, he shall
reimburse the Borough for the number of days he did not complete at five dollars
($5.00) per day, such reimbursement to be made within fourteen (14) days of the last
day of his attendance.

- 27 -

Any Police Officers attending such accredited approved Police training course
referred to herein, and which requires eight (8) hours per day attendance four (4) days
or more in any one week, will have their regular Police duties, during such period or
periods, assigned to them on the basis of actually working four (4) hours per day over
and above their eight (8) hours' school attendance during the same date. On those days
of any such week when any such Officer is not spending a full eight (8) hours in such
school attendance, such Officer shall be scheduled for his full eight (8) hour turn. In
those weeks when the specified school attendance and work schedule alone and by
themselves result in a Police Officer not working a full forty (40) hour week plus any
additional time in such week required to properly carry out his assigned duties, such
Police Officer will nevertheless be credited with a full week's work at straight time if, and
only if, he successfully completes the Police training course or courses which caused
him to work less than his ordinary daily and weekly hours.

The Borough shall make every effort to avoid requiring a Police Officer to work
immediately prior to or immediately subsequent to attendance at either a Mandatory
Police Training Class or up to two Approved Training Classes annually on those days
that an Officer is scheduled work. This shall not apply in the case of an emergency. All
days of Mandatory Police Training time and up to two days of Approved Police Training
time shall be counted as duty time for overtime calculation purposes and shall be paid
for at the Police Officer's regular daily rate of pay.

For the purpose of this article, an advance Police education course is defined as
a course, other than a re-qualification course, consisting of not less than thirty-two (32)
hours of classes, or in the discretion of the Mayor, a school of less than thirty-two (32)
hours may be certified, in writing, as equivalent to a thirty-two (32) hour school;
provided, however, that in no event will a school be certified which consists of less than
twenty-four (24) hours.

The Borough will provide a tuition reimbursement of up to seven hundred fifty
dollar ($750) per year to Officers upon successful completion of an approved course
providing the following criteria are met: (a) The Officer must be enrolled in an
associate's, bachelor's or master's degree track program; (b) The course work must be
in criminal justice, psychology, public administration or a course approved by the Public
Safety Committee; (c) The Officer must achieve a grade of "B" or better; and (d) The
course must be taken at any accredited college or university.

- 28 -

The Borough may provide a tuition reimbursement of up to seven hundred fifty
dollar ($750) per year to any Officer upon successful completion of an approved course
if funds are available in the budget and providing the following criteria are met: (a) The
Officer has provided a detailed, written request to the Chief of Police to take a specific
course identifying how it is relevant to his position and duties of a Police Officer; (b) The
Police Chief has reviewed and agreed to the benefit to the Borough and the need of
such course work; (c) The Public Safety Committee has reviewed the request, the
Police Chiefs recommendation and has approved the Officer's attendance at the course;
and (d) The Officer must achieve a grade of "B" or better in said course

ARTICLE 26
LONGEVITY PAY

A.

In addition to the compensation provided for herein, the same to be
incorporated into the Borough's salary Ordinance, each Police Officer shall receive a
longevity payment at the rates determined by the "Annual Base Pay Multiplier" set forth
in the accompanying scale for each year of service beyond two (2) years:
Years of Service
Percent of annual base pay
3
0.25
4
0.25
5
0.50
6
0.50
7
0.75
8
0.75
9
1.00
10
1.00
11
1.25
12
1.25
13
1.50
14
1.50
15
1.75
16
1.75
17
2.00
18
2.00
19
2.25
20
2.25
21
2.50
22
2.50
23
2.75
- 29 -

24
25
26
27
28
29
30

2.75
3.00
3.00
3.25
3.25
3.50
3.50

B.
The longevity pay increment shall not be included in the Officer's bi-weekly
pay but shall be paid in one lump sum in a separate check on the first pay day in
December during each calendar year of this Agreement.
ARTICLE 27
STATUTORY PROTECTION

Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny or restrict any Police Officer
of such rights as he or she may have under Act No. 111 of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, approved the 24th day of June, 1968, or Borough Code, Subsection (J),
known as "Civil Service for Police and Firemen" (53 P.S. ยง46171), or any and all
decisions and/or case law applicable to the above, or other applicable laws and
regulations. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny the Borough of
Bellevue, its Town Council, Mayor or Chief of Police, of any rights or powers it now has
or may have under the Home Rule Charter and under other applicable laws and
regulations. The rights granted to the Police Officer hereunder shall be deemed to be in
addition to those provided elsewhere, provided that the provisions of this contract are
not intended to grant rights or expand rights which are defined or limited by applicable
laws, nor should the provisions of this contract be construed as authorizing a violation of
applicable laws.

ARTICLE 28
NON-DISCRIMINATION

The parties hereto agree that the terms of this Agreement shall be, applied to all
Police Officers, irrespective of rank, without regard to color, creed, sex, national origin
or political affiliation, and that there shall be no discrimination, interference, intimidation,
restraint, or coercion by the Borough or any of its agents, against any member of the
Police force because of his membership in the collective bargaining unit or participation
in the grievance and/or arbitration process, and no Police Officer employed by the
- 30 -

Borough waives any of his rights, privileges or immunities afforded to the Police Officer
under the constitution of the United States of America or the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any laws that flow therefrom.

ARTICLE 29
DISCIPLINARY TRANSFERS/JUST CAUSE

A.
There shall be no transfer for disciplinary reasons. Any time there is a
transfer; the reasons should be set forth in writing and given to the Officer.
B.
No Officer shall be suspended, disciplined, reduced in rank or be deprived
of any advantage without just cause. Whether any suspension, disciplinary action,
reduction in rank or deprivation of any advantage is with or without just cause shall be
determined in accordance with the applicable provisions of Civil Service for Police and
Firemen Act (53 P.S. ยง 46171, et seq.) and other applicable laws or the grievance
procedure as set forth in Article 4, section (a)(3), of this contract.

)

C.
During the application process for promotions to the position of Sergeant
and/or Lieutenant, the Borough of Bellevue and/or the Borough of Bellevue Civil Service
Commission shall not consider in their application process any formal written
reprimands (sometimes referred to as "letter of reprimand") for the purpose of
disqualifying an otherwise qualified applicant. This provision shall not be construed to
limit management rights during the promotion process after the list of candidates for
promotion is certified by the Borough of Bellevue Civil Service Commission to the Town
Council of the Borough of Bellevue if such letters are final under the grievance
procedure.

D.

Police Officers "Bill of Rights"

1.
When an anonymous complaint is made against a Police Officer
and no corroborative evidence is obtained, the complaint shall be classified as
unfounded.
2.
When any citizen complaint is filed greater than ninety (90)
calendar days after the date of the alleged event complained of, which if true, could not
lead to a criminal charge, such complaint shall be classified as unfounded and the
accused employee shall not be required to submit a written report, but shall be notified
orally or in writing of such claim.
- 31-

3.
A Police Officer, whether a subject or witness, must be informed of
the nature of the interrogation at the outset of the interrogation.
4.
If the interrogated Police Officer writes a statement, or a transcript
is taken, or a mechanical/electronic record is made, a copy of the same must be given
to the interrogated Police Officer, without cost, upon request.
5.
If any Police Officer under interrogation is under arrest or is likely to
be placed under arrest as a result of the interrogation, he shall be completely informed
of all his rights prior to the commencement of the interrogation.
6.
At the request of any Police Officer under interrogation, he shall
have the right to be represented by counsel of his choice and/or a representative of the
Association of Bellevue Police who shall be present at all times during the interrogation.
The interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonable time until representation can be
obtained.
7.
Unless agreed to by the Officer, the Borough of Bellevue shall not
make any public comment on the reason for any disciplinary action brought against the
Officer.
E.
The provisions identified in Sections A and B of this Article are not
intended to restrict the Mayor or Chief of Police in the free exercise of their respective
authorities in assigning the Police Officers in a manner which in their respective sole
discretions they or either of them may deem necessary for the protection of the citizens
of the Borough of Bellevue.
F.
A copy of any disciplinary action taken against an Officer shall be placed
in that Officer's personnel file. A copy of any disciplinary action taken against an Officer
shall be provided to the Officer.
G.
Copies of any disciplinary action taken against an Officer shall be
removed from the Officer's personnel file if no additional disciplinary action for any
reason has been taken against said Officer for a period of three (3) years from the date
of the original disciplinary action.
H.
Discipline is recognized as essential and necessary element to a
professional department.
The purpose of this section is to establish a clear protocol regarding matter of
discipline. This section is intended to balance the need for the Borough's ability to
implement discipline and maintain standards while protecting each Officer's
Constitutional rights, including the right to due process.
As in Article 4, discipline should be handed at the lowest possible level.
- 32 -

Oral and written complaints will be directed to the Chief of Police. Complaints will
be handled as specified in Subsection 27.01 of the Bellevue Police Department Policy
and Procedure Manual. Complaints that the Chief of Police determines are "founded"
will be handled by the Chief or referred to Borough Council, at the Chiefs discretion. As
stated in Bellevue Police Department Police and Procedure Manual, The Chief of Police
may reprimand or suspend Officers for conduct in violation of the policy, the Borough
Personnel Code, Civil Service Code or other statute. The Chief of Police may still
handle matters of discipline at the lowest level informally if agreed upon between he/she
and the accused Officer and/or Union representative or legal counsel.
An Officer may appeal discipline by filing through the grievance procedure or with
the Civil Service Commission, at the discretion of the accused Officer. All hearings
regarding these matters will be private unless the Officer chooses to allow the hearings
to be public, when and where possible.
ARTICLE 30
SCHEDULING

No Police Officer without his written consent shall be required to work more than
four (4) months on any one turn in a calendar year. In the event a Police Officer is
required to work more than four (4) months on any one turn in a calendar year, he shall
have the right to seek proper relief through the grievance procedure as set forth in
Article 4 hereof.
No Lieutenant or Sergeant without his written consent shall be required to work
more than four (4) months on any one turn in a calendar year. In the event a Lieutenant
or Sergeant is required to work more than four (4) months on any one turn in a calendar
year, he shall have the right to seek proper relief through the aforesaid grievance
procedure.
A schedule shall be posted at all times indicating the days and shifts to be
worked by all Officers for a minimum of two months in advance. The posted schedule
may be changed or altered due to situations and events (i.e. injury, illness, family
emergencies and the like) but all Officers will be advised of the need for the changes
before those changes are made.
As has been the practice for the safety of Officers and providing proper service to
the Borough each shift shall be staffed with a minimum of two (2) full-time sworn Police
Officers per shift, not including the Chief of Police.

- 33 -

ARTICLE 31
OFF-DUTY PROTECTION

Police Officers by the nature of their positions are on call round the clock.

When a Police Officer is off-duty and due to circumstances which, in the Officer's
discretion, he deems it necessary to act for the protection of property and/or life within
the corporate limits of the Borough of Bellevue, said Officer, in so acting, shall be
covered with and protected by all the benefits provided for the Police Officers as set
forth in the current Agreement between the Borough of Bellevue and the Association of
Bellevue Police.

This provision shall not diminish or affect any rights; privileges or benefits said
Officer might have under applicable State and Federal statutes.
ARTICLE 32
DUE DEDUCTIONS

)
The Borough of Bellevue, as employer, shall deduct from each Police Officer's,
Sergeants and Lieutenant's salary the sum of money identified by the Union as dues
each pay and transmit said proceeds to the Treasurer of the Association of Bellevue
Police, provided:
(1)
The Borough of Bellevue is furnished written authorization as provided on
a form by the Borough from each Officer from whose pay the dues are to be deducted;
and
(2)

That said funds will be transmitted to the Treasurer of the Association, 537

Bayne Avenue, Bellevue, PA 15202, until such time as the Borough is advised in writing
that the Treasurer and/or his address has been changed.

ARTICLE 33
POLICE ASSOCIATION FILE SPACE

The Borough of Bellevue shall provide space for the Association of Bellevue Police for
two (2) file cabinets in the Police area of the Borough Hall, 537 Bayne Avenue.
- 34 -

ARTICLE 34
MILITARY LEAVE

The Borough of Bellevue will comply with applicable Federal and State laws with
respect to military service of any member of its Police force.
ARTICLE 35
EQUIPMENT

A.

The Borough of Bellevue shall equip each Police vehicle with a trunk

organizer equipped as required for the Police Officer to perform his normally assigned
duties.
B.
The Borough of Bellevue shall provide copies of the following two (2)
items in the "Squad Room" of the Police Department.
1.
One copy of the Motor Vehicle Code and update inserts as they are
published and received; and
2.
One copy of the Crime Code and updated inserts as they are
published and received.
C.
The Borough of Bellevue shall provide for use by each Officer one copy of
the Motor Vehicle Code and updated inserts as they are published and received and
one copy of the Crime Code and updated inserts as they are published and received.

ARTICLE 36
PAY PERIOD

The pay period shall be defined as two (2) weeks, and the Officer shall be paid not later
than one calendar week after the end of each pay period.
- 35 -

ARTICLE 37
DROP PROGRAM

A Deferred Retirement Option Plan ("DROP") shall be implemented effective
January 1, 2013 or such earlier dates as the Borough may, by ordinance, adopt a
DROP program. This shall be the first date that eligible Officers may enter the DROP.
The terms and provisions of the DROP shall be substantially as set forth in the
document marked Exhibit "A", which is attached hereto and incorporated herein as if
fully set forth.

ARTICLE 38
PART-TIME EMPLOYEES

A. Part-time officers shall receive only the benefits set forth in this Article and shall
not be entitled to any other benefit set forth in this Collective Bargaining
Agreement.
8. Part-time officers shall be paid at a rate of seventy percent (70%) of the rate set
forth for a fifth year patrol officer.
C. Part-time officers shall not be used by the Borough while any full-time police
officer is on layoff.
D. Part-time officers shall be scheduled to work as determined appropriate in the
sole discretion of the Borough but shall be scheduled so they average less than
thirty (30) hours per week.

E. Part-time officers may be scheduled in advance or may be called to fill in for
vacancies or absences due to illness, injury, vacation, or other leaves known in
advance. Emergency overtime shall be first offered to full time officers.
Emergency overtime shall be deemed that overtime which results from an officer
who makes known his attention not to appear for his scheduled shift within 24
hours of that shift thereby limiting the time the Borough has to fill that vacancy if
in its discretion, it intends to do so. The parties are directed to establish
protocols for dealing with this issue and the panel will retain jurisdiction resolving
any disputes that may result.
- 36 -

F. Work opportunities available at the request of outside entities (for example,
PennDOT, school football games, and other opportunities for which the Borough
received reimbursement for any wages paid to officers) shall be first offered to
full time police officers.
G. Uniforms and equipment for part-time officers shall be provided at the Borough's
expense.
H. In the event a part-time officer who is not eligible for health insurance under this
agreement becomes eligible as a result of the application of the requirements of
the Affordable Care Act, the employee shall be offered the lowest cost plan the
Borough can provide while satisfying the ACA requirements and shall be required
to pay the maximum amount required under the ACA. The coverage provided
will be individual only with the ability of the part-time officer to purchase coverage
for dependents. This benefit will be available only as it is necessary to comply
with the ACA and its implementing regulations and eligibility or ineligibility shall
be governed exclusively thereby.

)
In the event the Borough elects to hire and utilize part-time officers, the Borough and Association agree
to re-open Article 38 Part-Time Employees with the purpose to explore, amend, or re-negotiate the
verbiage included in said Article. It is agreed that no other articles will be altered or changed as part of
such re-opener.

- 37 -

SIGNATURE PAGE

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be
executed, in duplicate, the day and year first above written, each of which shall
constitute and original.

ATTEST:

BOROUGH OF BELLEVUE:

Director of Administrative Services

By~
President of Council

WITNESS:

ASSOCIATION OF BELLEVUE POLICE:

- 38-

ยง 637. State police, enforcement, officers, investigators, parole agents, correction officers, psychiatric
security aides, drug enforcement agents, policemen, firemen, park guards; injuries and diseases;
compensation and expenses

(a) Any member of the State Police Force, any enforcement officer or investigator employed by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board, and the parole agents, enforcement officers and Investigators of the
Pennsylvania Board of Probation and Parole, Capitol Police officers, correction officers employed by the
Department of Corrections, whose principal duty is the care, custody and control of inmates, psychiatric,
security aides employed by the Department of Public Welfare and the Department of Corrections, whose
principal duty is the care, custody, and control of the criminally insane, and drug enforcement agents of the
Office of Attorney General whose principal duty is the enforcement of the drug laws of the Commonwealth, any
member of the Delaware River Port Authority Police or any policeman, fireman or park guard of any county,
city, borough, town or township, who is injured in the performance of his duties including, in the case of
firemen, duty as special fire police, and by reason thereof is temporarily incapacitated from performing his
duties, shall be paid by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania if a member of the State Police Force or an
enforcement officer or Investigator employed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board or the parole agents,
enforcement officers and investigators of the Pennsylvania Board of Probation and Parole, Capitol Police
officers, correction officers E:mployedby the Department of Corrections, whose principal duty is the care,
custody and control of inmates, psychiatric security aides employed by the Department of Public Welfare and
the Department of Corrections, whose principal duty is the care, custody, and control of the criminally insane,
and drug enforcement agents of the Office of Attorney General whose principal duty is the enforcement of the
drug laws of the Commonwealth, or by the Delaware River Port Authority if a member of the Delaware River
Port Authority Police or by the county, township or municipality, by which he is employed, his full rate of salary,
as fixed by ordinance or resolution, until the disability arising therefrom has ceased. All medical and hospital
bills, incurred in connection with any such injury, shall be paid by the; Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by the
Delaware River Port Authority or by such '-county, township or municipality. During the time salary for
temporary incapacity shall be paid by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by the Delaware River Port
Authority, or by the county, city, borough, town or township, any workmen's compensation, received
or collected by any such employee for such period, shall be turned over to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or to the Delaware River Port Authority or to such county, city, borough, town or township, and paid into the
treasury thereof, and if such payment shall not be so made by the employee the amount so due the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Delaware River Port Authority or the county, city, borough, town or
township shall be deducted from any salary then or thereafter becoming due and owing.
โข (b) In the case of the State Police Force, enforcement officers and investigators employed by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board and the parole agents, enforcement 'officers and investigators of the
Pennsylvania Hoard of Probation and Parole, Capitol Police officers, correction officers employed by the
Department of Corrections, whose principal duty is the care, custody and control of inmates, psychiatric
security aides employed by the Department of Public Welfare and the Department of Corrections whose
principal duty is the care, custody, and control of the criminally insane, and drug enforcement agents of the
Office of Attorney General whose principal duty is the enforcement of the drug laws of the Commonwealth,
members of the Delaware River .Port Authority Police and salaried policemen and firemen who have seized for
four consecutive years, or longer, diseases of the heart and tuberculosis of the respiratory ; system, contracted
or incurred by any of them after four years of continuous service as such, and caused by extreme overexertion
in time-B of stress or danger or by exposure to heat, smoke, fumes or gases, arising directly out of the
employment of any such member of the State Police Force, enforcement officer, investigator employed by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board; guard or enforcement officer employed by the Department of Corrections
or parole agent, enforcement officer or investigator of the Pennsylvania Board of Probation and Parole, Capitol

- 39 -

Police officers, correction officers employed by the Department of Corrections whose principal duty is the care,
custody and control of inmates, psychiatric security aides employed by the Department of Public Welfare and

53 P.S. ยง 637 MUNICIPAL & QUASI-MUN. CORPS.
the Department of Corrections whose principal duty is the care, custody, and control of the criminally insane,
and drug enforcement agents of the Office of Attorney General whose principal duty is the enforcement of the
drug laws of the Commonwealth, member of the Delaware River Port Authority Police, or policeman or fireman,
shall be compensable in accordance with the terms hereof; and unless any such disability shall be compensate
under the compensation laws as having been caused by accidental injury, such disability shall be compensable
as occupational disease disabilities are presently compensable under the compensation laws of this
Commonwealth. It shall be presumed that tuberculosis of the respiratory system contracted or incurred after
four consecutive years of service was contracted or incurred as a direct result of employment.
. (c) In the case of any person receiving benefits pursuant to this act, the statutes of limitations set forth in
sections 30G.1, 315, 413, and 434 of the act of June 2, 1915 (P.L. 736, No. 338), known as "The Pennsylvania
Workmen's Compensation Act, 1 " shall not begin to run until the expiration of the receipt of benefits
pursuant to this act.
(d) All payments herein required to be made by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania on account of any member
of- the State Police Force shall be made from moneys appropriated to the Pennsylvania State Police, and any
payments required to be made on account of any enforcement; officer or investigator employed by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board shall be from appropriations out of the State Stores Fund, any payments
required to be made on account of any parole agent, enforcement officer or investigator employed by the
Pennsylvania Board of Probation and Parole shall be from moneys appropriated to the Pennsylvania Board of
Probation and Parole, any payments required to. be made on account of Capitol Police officers shall be made
from moneys appropriated to the Department of General Services, any payments required to be made on
account of any correction officer shall be made from moneys appropriated to the Department of Corrections,
any payments required to be made on-account of any psychiatric security aides shall be made from moneys
appropriated to the Department of Public Welfare or the Department of Corrections where appropriate, and any
payments required to be made on account of any drug enforcement agent shall be made from moneys
appropriated, to the Office of Attorney General.
As amended 1974, May 31, P.L. 309, No. 9<3, ยง 1, effective in 90 days; 1978, July 1, P.L.
687, No. 117; ยง 2, imd. effective; 1986, Dec. 19, P.L. 1733, No. 208, ยง 1, effective in 30 days.
1 77 P.S. ยงยง 516, 602, 771 to 774 and 1001.

- 40-

