COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE TOWNSHIP OF FRAZER
AND

FRAZER TOWNSHIP POLICE AS SOCIATIO

JANUARY

1, 2020 THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2021

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Article I.

Recognition and Scope ..............................................................................

1

Article II.

Management Rights .................................................................................

1

Article ill.

Grievance Procedure and Arbitration .............................................................

2

Article IV.

Wages, Overtime and Hours ........................................................................

3

Article V.

Uniforms and Equipment. ..........................................................................

4

Article VI.

Holidays ...............................................................................................

4

Article VII.

Paid Time Off........................................................................................

4

Article VIII.

Bereavement Leave.................................................................................

4

Article IX.

Jury and Witness Duty Leave ......................................................................

5

Article X.

Court and Magistrate Appearances ................................................................

5

Article XI.

Benefits ................................................................................................

5

Article XII.

Pension ................................................................................................

6

Article XIII.

Regionalization of Police Servicers ...............................................................

6

Article XIV.

Waiver. ................................................................................................

6

Article XV.

Savings Clause .......................................................................................

6

Article XVI.

Term of Agreement ..................................................................................

6

Article XVII.

Miscellaneous .........................................................................................

6

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
TIDS COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT (the "Agreement"), made and entered
into this 6th day of January, 2020,
BY AND BETWEE :

THE TOWNSHIP OF FRAZER, a Second Class Township and political subdivision of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, situated in Allegheny County, with its principal office located at 592
Pittsburgh Mills Circle, Frazer Township, PA 15084, by and through the Board of Supervisors of Frazer
Township (hereinafter referred to as the "Township");
AND

FRAZER TOWNSHIP POLICE ASSOCIATION, a group of full-time police officers employed by the
Township organized for purposes of collective bargaining (hereinafter referred to as the "Union").
WITNESSETH

In consideration of the mutual promises set forth below and intending to be legally bound, the parties
agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
RECOGNITION AND SCOPE
The Township hereby recognizes the Frazer Township Police Association as the sole and exclusive
collective bargaining representative of all full-time police officers, sergeants and corporals employed by
the Township as set forth below, with respect to compensation, hours of work, working conditions and
other terms and conditions of employment. The bargaining unit shall consist of all full-time police officers,
sergeants and corporals and shall exclude all other department employees, including but not limited to
administrative employees, part-time employees, probationary employees, lieutenant, captain, Chief of
Police and any other supervisory employees.

ARTICLE II
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Section 1. The Township has and retains all management rights and functions to manage the Township
and the employees covered by this Agreement as conferred upon it by the Constitutions and laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and of the United States except insofar as these rights are limited by
specific provisions of this Agreement. It is understood and agreed that the Township, at its sole discretion,
shall have and retain, solely and exclusively, in accordance with applicable laws, all managerial
responsibilities including, but not limited to, the right to manage all operations; to determine the mission,
purposes, objectives, policies, programs and functions, standards of service and organizational structure of
the Township; to establish, amend, modify its overall budget; to establish, change combine or abolish job
classifications or the job content of any classification; to reprimand, suspend, discharge, take other
disciplinary action or otherwise relieve employees from duty for lack of work or other legitimate reasons;
to hire, promote, retire, demote transfer, layoff and recall employees to work; to schedule the workforce; to
determine the starting and quitting time, and the number of hours and shifts to be worked; to end shifts
early and make call outs; to determine the number and types of employees required and to assign work to

such employees in accordance with the operational needs of the Township and direct the workforce and
establish the terms and conditions of employment, except as expressly modified or restricted by a specific
provision of this Agreement. Matters of inherent managerial policy are reserved exclusively to the
Township.

Section 2. The rights set forth in this Article will not be used for the purpose of discrimination against any
employee by virtue of the employee's membership in the Union.
Section 3. It is the intent of the parties that the Township's right to manage shall include all rights
authorized by law immediately prior to the signing of this Agreement, unless such legal right is specifically
limited by a clear provision of this Agreement.
Section 4. The listing of specific rights in this Article is not intended to be, nor should it be considered
restrictive or a waiver of any rights of management not listed and not specifically surrendered herein,
whether or not such rights have been exercised by the Township in the past. Further, all inherent managerial
rights, management functions and prerogatives which the Township has not expressly modified or restricted
by a specific provision of this Agreement are retained and vested exclusively in the Township.
ARTICLE ill
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE AND ARBITRATION
Section 1. Grievances within the meaning of this Article shall consist of disputes regarding the
interpretation or application of this Agreement, all matters of discipline and all matters involving the Heart
and Lung Act, 53 P.S. ยง 637, as amended.
Section 2. In the event of a grievance concerning the interpretation or application of this Agreement,
discipline or the Heart and Lung Act, 53 P.S. ยง 637, as amended, there shall be no suspension of work, but
rather, such controversy shall be treated as a grievance and shall be processed in the following manner:
STEP ONE - POLICE CHIEF
The Union shall submit a grievance in writing to the Police Chief within five (5) calendar days of
the events giving rise to the grievance or the discovery of said grievance. The Police Chief shall
hold a meeting to attempt to resolve the grievance to the mutual satisfaction of the Union and the
Township within five (5) calendar days of its presentation. The Police Chief shall report his/her
decision to the Union and the Township in writing. If the Union does not proceed with the
grievance to Step Two within the prescribed time limits, and no extension of time is granted in
writing, the grievance shall be considered to be resolved.
STEP TWO-TOWNSIIlP SECRETARY OR IDS/HER DESIGNEE
If the Union disagrees with the disposition of the grievance at Step One, the Union may submit a
written appeal to the Township Secretary within five (5) calendar days of the Union's receipt of the
Step One decision. The Township Secretary shall, within ten (10) calendar days of the receipt of
the appeal, hold a meeting with the Union at which time the Union may present the grievance. The
Township Secretary, within ten (I 0) calendar days of the meeting shall provide the Union with a
written decision. If the Union does not proceed with the grievance to Step Three within the
prescribed time limits, and no extension of time is granted in writing, the grievance shall be
considered to be resolved.

2

STEP THREE - ARBITRATION
If the Union disagrees with the disposition of the grievance at Step Two, the Union must appeal to
arbitration within five (5) calendar days. A demand for arbitration shall be initiated by presenting
a notice, in writing, to the Township of the Union's intent to proceed to arbitration. Within ten (10)
calendar days of the demand for arbitration the Township and Union shall mutually attempt to agree
upon an arbitrator. In the event the parties fail to agree upon an arbitrator, the Union shall, within
five (5) calendar days thereafter, request that the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service
furnish the parties with a list of seven (7) arbitrators from which the parties will select an impartial
arbitrator. Within five (5) working days after the receipt of the list, an arbitrator will be selected
by the parties alternatively striking from the list of seven (7) arbitrators. The Union shall strike
first and the last name remaining shall be the arbitrator.

Section 3. The arbitrator shall have no power to add or subtract from or otherwise modify any of the terms
of the Agreement, nor shall the arbitrator substitute his or her discretion for that of the Township or the
Union. The arbitrator shall confine his or her decision solely to the application and interpretation of this
Agreement. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding.
Section 4. Each party shall fully bear its own costs in the processing of the grievance. The cost of the
arbitrator shall be divided equally between the Township and the Union.
ARTICLE IV
WAGES, OVERTIME AND HOURS

Section 1. Hourly wages during the term of this Agreement are as follows:
2021
Sergeant

$22.56

$23.24

Section 2. Any full-time officer hired during the course of this Agreement shall be paid at the starting rate
determined in the sole discretion of the Township Board of Supervisors.
Section 3. Overtime pay at the rate of time and one half shall be paid for all time worked in excess of 40
hours in a week.
Section 4. The Township shall not guarantee overtime work to any officer, nor shall any officer have any
preference or right of refusal as to any overtime work which may become available. The assignment of
such work shall be within the sole discretion of the Police Chief.
Section 5. Any shifts that are not filled, special events or other special details will be filled by part-time
officers unless the Chief determines and subsequently notifies the Township Secretary in writing that a fulltime officer is necessary and the reasons that a full-time officer is necessary.
Section 6. All call-outs shall be compensated at straight time from the time the officer reports for duty.
There shall be no minimum payment. A call-out shall be any time an officer is requested to report for duty
for an unscheduled shift, in full or in part, due to the need for additional police manpower within the
Township. All call-outs shall be made or approved by the Chief of Police.
Section 7. The Township Police Department is a full time police force and historically, its full-time officers
have regularly been offered 40 hours of work per week, or 2,080 hours of work per year. It is the expectation
that the Township will continue its Police operation in such fashion during each year of this Agreement.
3

However, it is recognized by the Union and the Township that economic circumstances could arise that
would impair the Township's financial ability to maintain operations at their present level. For this reason,
the Township cannot and does not guarantee to its officers any minimum number of hours of work.

ARTICLE V
UNIFORMSANDEOUJPMENT
The Township shall provide all uniforms and equipment to all full-time officers and shall replace all worn
or broken uniforms and equipment at the Township's expense. The Township, at its sole discretion, shall
determine what uniform and equipment shall be issued to each officer and whether a uniform or equipment
shall be replaced.

ARTICLE VI
HOLIDAYS
Section 1. Full-time officers shall be paid eight (8) hours of holiday pay for the following holidays: (1)
ew Year's Day; (2) Good Friday; (3) Memorial Day; (4) Independence Day; (5) Labor Day; (6)
Thanksgiving Day; (7) Christmas Eve Day; (8) Christmas Day; and (9) Veterans Day
Section 2. Holiday pay is paid at a full-time officer's straight time pay rate. All full-time officers shall be
paid the equivalent of eight (8) hours straight time pay for each holiday. Holiday pay shall be made in the
pay period during which the holiday falls.
Section 3. A holiday that falls on a Saturday will be observed on the preceding Friday. A holiday that falls
on a Sunday will be observed on the following Monday. If a holiday falls during a full-time officer's paid
time off, holiday pay will be provided instead of the paid time off benefit that would have otherwise applied.
If a full-time officer works on a holiday, he or she will receive holiday pay plus wages at his or her straight
time rate for the hours worked on the holiday. Paid time off for holidays will not count as hours worked
for purposes of determining eligibility for overtime.
ARTICLE VII
PAID TIME OFF
Section 1. Full-time officers shall be entitled to eighty (80) hours of paid time off ("PTO"). PTO time may
be used for any absences (i.e. sick, vacation, personal, etc.). PTO accrues at a rate of 1/12 of the officer's
yearly PTO total per month. PTO is paid at the full-time officer's regular straight time. PTO will not be
part of any overtime calculations. Full-time officers may not borrow against their PTO banks; therefore,
no advance leave will be granted.
Section 2. Full-time officers may carry PTO over from year to year up to a maximum PTO bank of eighty
(80) hours. Upon resignation, separation or retirement, all full-time officers will be paid a rate of 50% of
the employee's current hourly rate for all PTO hours banked, up to a maximum of eighty (80) hours.
ARTICLEVID
BEREAVEMENT LEA VE
Section 1. Full-time officers shall be entitled to a maximum of three (3) days off with pay in the event of
a death in the full-time officer's immediate family (spouse, parent, child, spouse's child). Full-time officers
shall be entitled to a maximum of three (3) days off with pay in the event of death of a full-time officer's
sibling, spouse's parent, spouse's sibling, child's spouse, grandparents or grandchildren. Documented
proof of death may be requested by the Township.
4

Section 2. Time paid as bereavement leave will not be calculated as time worked for payment of overtime
premiums.
ARTICLE IX
JURY AND WITNESS DUTY LEA VE

Section 1. Any full-time officer called to serve as a juror will be compensated for the difference in the
employee's regular daily wage and the amount paid to the employee by the court, up to a maximum of forty
(40) hours of leave per calendar year.
Section 2. If a full-time officer is required to serve jury duty beyond the period of paid jury duty leave, the
officer may use any available paid time off or the officer may request an unpaid jury duty leave of absence.
Section 3. This benefit does not apply to full-time officers who volunteer for jury duty. A copy of the jury
summons and pay voucher must be submitted to the Chief of Police. Full-time officers may be required to
show proof of the time that you reported for and were excused from jury duty on any particular date(s).
Section 4. All full-time officers may request paid time off when subpoenaed or otherwise required to testify
as a witness by the Township outside of the officer's regularly scheduled shift. Officers should notify their
supervisor immediately after receiving a subpoena. Except as required in the course of their employment,
full-time officers will not be granted paid leave to appear in court as a witness at the request of any party
other than the Township. Full-time officers are free to use any available PTO to appear as a witness.
Section 5. Full-time officers who are excused for jury duty or witness leave and are able work two (2)
hours or more of their regular shift that day are expected to do so.
Section 6. Time paid under this Article will not be calculated as hours worked for the purpose of paying
overtime premiums.
ARTICLEX
COURT AND MAGISTRATE APPEARANCES
All full-time officers shall be paid their regular rate of pay for all court related appearances whether such
appearances occur during the officers regularly scheduled shift or during off-duty hours. Officers will be
paid any overtime premiums in accordance with Article IV of this Agreement. Full-time officers shall be
reimbursed for parking fees documented by a receipt for court related appearances. Full-time officers will
also be reimbursed mileage at the prevailing IRS standard mileage rate if the full-time officer's personal
vehicle is used to travel to a court related appearance.

ARTICLE XI
BENEFITS
All full-time officers shall be entitled to participate in the Township's group health insurance plan which
provides full-time officers and their dependents access to medical insurance benefits. This coverage
includes optional vision and dental insurance, the premiums for which are paid in full by the eligible fulltime officers. All full-time officers are also entitled to participate in the Township's life insurance and long
term disability programs. The Township reserves the right to change providers and coverage of any of the
above-referenced programs at any time, and will provide full-time officers with the notice of any changes.

5

ARTICLE XII
PENSION
All full-time officers shall be enrolled in a pension plan maintained by the Township and the Pennsylvania
Municipal Retirement System (the "Plan") subject to the terms set forth in the Frazer Township Police
Pension Plan Agreement dated September 2, 2008, as amended from time to time. All full-time officers
shall contribute 5% of their total compensation to the Plan.
ARTICLE XIII
REGIONALIZATION OF POLICE SERVICES
It is recognized that the Township, at its sole discretion, may enter into an agreement to create a regional
police department, thereby disbanding the Frazer Township Police Department. The Union waives any
obligation to bargain with the Township with respect to the Township's decision to join a regional police
department.
ARTICLE XIV
WAIVER
The parties acknowledge that each has the right and opportunity to make demands and proposals with
respect to any and all proper subjects of collective bargaining and that all such subjects have been discussed
and negotiated and the terms of this Agreement were arrived at after free exercise of such rights and
opportunities. Therefore, it is understood and agreed that neither party has any further obligation to bargain
collectively with respect to any subject or matter not spe:::ifically referred to or covered in this Agreement,
even though such subject or matter may not have been within the knowledge or contemplation of either or
both parties at the time they negotiated and/or signed this Agreement
ARTICLE XV
SA VIN GS CLAUSE

If any provision of this Agreement is subsequently declared by any proper legislative or judicial action to
be unlawful or unenforceable, all other provisions of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect
for the duration of this Agreement and both parties agree to implement these legislative or judicial changes
without reopening this Agreement.
ARTICLE XVI
TERM OF AGREEMENT
This Agreement shall be in force and effect from the first day of January 2020 until December 31, 2021
and may not be reopened during such time without the mutual written consent of both parties.
ARTICLE XVII
MISCELLANEOUS

Section 1. Governing Law. This Agreement shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania without regard to its principals regarding conflicts of law.
Section 2. Entire Agreement; Amendment. This Agreement contains the entire agreement between the
parties, supersedes all prior agreements or proposals except as specifically incorporated herein, and cannot
be changed, except as permitted by law, without written amendment approved by both the Township and
the Union.
6

Section 3. Interpretation. For purposes of this Agreement, any words used in the masculine shall include
the feminine and neuter, and any words used in the singular shall include the plural, and vice versa.
Additionally, for purposes of this Agreement, the Township and the Union may be collectively referred to
as the "parties" and individually as "party". Further, the section and paragraph headings to this Agreement
are for convenience and reference only, and the words contained the section and paragraph headings shall
in no way be held to explain, modify, amplify or aid in the interpretation, construction, or meaning of the
provisions of this Agreement.
Section 4. Counterparts. This Agreement may be executed in any number of counterparts, each of which
when executed and delivered shall be deemed to be an original, and all such counterparts taken together
shall constitute one and the same instrument. Executed counterparts may be provided by the parties in
facsimile form or in the form of scanned PDF/electronic documents, and execution in these manners shall
be deemed to be execution in the original.
THIS AGREEMENT is made by virtue of a motion of the Township Board of Supervisors passed at its
meeting on January 6, 2020.

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Union has caused this Agreement to be duly executed by its proper
corporate officers, and the said Township has caused this Agreement to be duly executed and its seal to be
affixed and duly attested by its proper officers on the day and year written above.

TOWNSHIP OF FRAZER

ATTEST:

~

,/2.--

~K.

K-

~<

Ziencik
Township Secretary

~

_,,

By:\,,
Matthew S. Beacom
Chairman, Board of Supervisors

(SEAL)

ATTEST/WITNESS:

FRAZER TOWNSHIP POLICE ASSOCIATIO

7

