I
I

I
'

I
I

Collier Township Police Department

I

I.

Current Articles of Agreement

;

I

I'

2019-2023

{DocNo~00415468.l}

Table of Contents

I

Article I: Preamble

Pagel

Article II: Wages
Section l: Salary
Section 2: New Hires
Section 3: Shift Differential
Section 4: Office-In-Charge-Pay
Section 5: Longevity
Section 6: Educational Benefits

Pages 1-2

Article III: Uniform and Clothing Allowance
Section l: Clothing Allowance
. Section 2: Clothing Allowance Purchases
Section 3: New Hire Uniform Issue
Section 4: Lost or Damaged Items
Section 5: Bulletproof Vests

Page 3

Article IV: Overtime/Working Hours
Section l: Overtime
Section 2: Working Hours
Section 3: Court Pay for Off-Duty Officers
Section 4: Special Details
Section 5: Departmental Meetings
Section 6: Compensatory Time

Pages 3-7

Article V: Absent Time/Sick Leave
Section 1: Sick Leave
Section 2: Bereavement Leave
Section 3: Emergency Leave
Section 4: Personal Days/Holiday Pass Days
Section 5: Long-Term Leave

Pages 7-8

Article VI: Vacation

Page 9

Article VII: Pension
Section 1: Pension Provisions
Section 2: Unused Sick Leave Pay
Section 3: Post-Retirement Health Care Insurance
Section 4: Pension Board Members

Pages 9-12

I DocNo~004 l S468.1]

Section 5: Post-Retirement Death Benefit Insurance

Article VIII: Miscellaneous
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section
Section

Pages 13-18

1: Personal V chicle Reimbursement
2: Residency Restrictions
3: Jury Duty
4: Off-Duty Employment
5: False Arrest Insurance
6: Seniority Provision
7: Life Insurance
8: Past Practice Provision
9: Health Care Insurance
10: Voluntary Physical Agility Test
11: Agency Shop
12: Police Officers Bill of Rights
13: Training
14: Civil Rights Violation Insurance
15: Part-Time Officers
16: Management Rights
17: Drug and Alcohol Policy
18: Secondary Employment
19: Return to Work Requirements

Article IX: Grievance Procedure

Pages 18-20

Exhibit "A"
Pages 21-22
Full-Time Police Officer Initial Uniform/Equipment Issue
Exhibit "B"
Police Officer Bill of Rights

Page 23

Exhibit "C"
DROP Pension Benefit Provision

Pages 24-26

Exhibit "D"
Weapons Purchase Program

Page 27

Exhibit "E"
MBS 500 RX-1 Option 1

Page 28-29

Attachments

Page 30

{DocNo~D04I546lLl

l

ii

Execution Page

Page 31

I
I

{DocNo=004!5468. l }

iii

Article I: Preamble
This Agreement is made by mid between the Township of Collier, a First Class
Township of the Commonwealth of Pem1sylvania, (hereinafter called "Township"), and the
Police Officers employed by the Township of Collier by and through their collective bargaining
unit, the Collier Township Police Association Wage and Policy Unit (hereinafter called
"Police").
WHEREAS, these Articles of Agreement have been executed by the parties
pursuant to Act 111.
NOW, THEREFORE, the Township mid the Police, on behalf of the policepersons
employed by the Township, hereby agree mid covenant as follows:
I.

The tenn of this Agreement shall be five years, commencing Jmiuary 1,
2019 through December 31, 2023.

2.

This Agreement shall apply to all full-time, probationary mid part-time
police employees in the Unit. The Unit shall consist of all of the patrol persons
excluding the Chief of Police. It is understood mid agreed that a probationary
employee shall not have access to the grievmice and arbitration provisions of the
Agreement if the probationary employee is discharged during probation.

* *The term "Probationary", as used in this contract, refers to those newly
appointed patrolpersons pursuant tc Section 640 of the First Class Township
Code. The term "Full-time" shall refer to officers with over one year of service.
3.

All reopening demands shall be in strict conformity of Act 111.

Article II: Wages
Section 1: Salary

I

The base wages of a patrolman shall be increased in each of the first two years year of the
Agreement by three and one half (3.5%) percent and increased in each of the last three
years of the Agreement by three (3%) percent. Newly hired employees shall continue to
progress to the base rate over the six-year progression set forth in Article II, Section 2.
Patrolman wages during the term of the Agreement shall be:
Effective January 1, 2019 -$91,831.66
Effective January 1, 2020 - $95,045.77
Effective January 1, 2021 - $97,897.14
Effective January 1, 2022 - $100,834.05
Effective January 1, 2023 - $103,859.07
a. A Sergeant shall earn 7.5% more thmi a Patrol Officer.
Effective January 1, 2019 - $98,719.04
{DocNo~004 I 5468 I )

1

I
I
I

Effective
Effective
Effective
Effective

January
January
January
January

I

- $102,174.20
- $105,239.43
- $108,396.60
- $111,648.50

**The maximum base salary for Patrol Officers shall be as stated. The maximum salary
shall be reached after the completion of five (5) full years of service.

Section 2: New Hires
Full-time police officers shall receive prorated personal days; sick days and holiday pass
days during their first year of employment. Full-time police officers hired after January 1,
2019 shall be paid in accordance with the following schedule:
YEAR OF

I

1, 2020
1, 2021
1, 2022
1, 2023

First year
Second year
Third year
Fourth year
Fifth year
Sixth year and more

% OF FULL-TIME
75%
80%
85%
90%
95%
100%

Section 3: Shift Differential
There shall be provided a shift differential with second shift (starting time between 14001500) receiving an additional $0.25 per hour, third shift (starting time between 22002300) receiving an additional $0.35 per hour. Overtime will be calculated on base pay
and the shift differential.
Section 4: Officer-In-Charge Pay
The Township shall pay the senior officer on duty at a rate equal to two ($2.00) dollars
per hour more than the rate applicable to the base rate for the individual patrol officer as
set forth in Article II Section la for each hour when a sergeant is not present on a shift.
Section 5: Longevity
All full-time officers shall be entitled to receive longevity pay of 1% of salary after the
completion of five (5) years of service, with an additional 0.3% each year thereafter to a
maximum of7.0%.

Section 6: Educational Benefits
The educational benefit shall be $250.00 for the attainment of an Associates Degree in a field
related to law enforcement; $500.00 for the attainment of a Bachelor's Degree in a field related to
law enforcement and $750.00 for the attainment of a Master's Degree in a field related to law
enforcement.
Any officer eligible for a payment under this section shall receive the payment in January. No
!DocNo~004I 546B.I }

2

employee hired on or after January 1, 2016 shall be entitled to payment for an associate or
bachelor degree.

Article III: Uniform and Clothing Allowance
Section 1: Clothing Allowance
The Township of Collier shall provide a uniform and clothing allowance for each officer in the
amount of $975. The said unifotm and clothing allowance shall be paid bv check to each
member of the police department no later than the last day of January of each calendar year.
Newly hired police officers will continue to receive the original issue of uniforms and
equipment listed on Exhibit "A" hereto. On the officer's first anniversary of employment, the
officer will receive a pro-rated uniform allowance for the rest of the calendar year based upon
the numbers of months remaining.
Section 2: Clothing Allowance Purchases
The clothing allowance shall be used to purchase authorized clothing and equipment, which is
identified on Exhibit "A" which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference, or any
other clothing and equipment which is authorized by the Chief of Police. Police officers \,ill
provide the Township receipts for eligible uniform expenses within thirty (30) days of
purchase. If a police officer does not give the Township receipts for eligible uniform expenses
in the full amount of the annual uniform and clothing allowance, by December 31 of each year,
the police officer's uniform allowance will be reduced for the next calendar year by the amount
of the receipts not submitted,
The Weapons Purchase Program attached hereto as Exhibit "D" will be effective beginning
calendar year 2013, Officers may only purchase one weapon at a time under the Program.

Section 3: New Hire Uniform Issue
All new patrol persons hired by Collier Township will be fully uniformed when hired by the
Township and shall not be included in the clothing allowance until the second anniversary of
their hiring.
Section 4: Lost/Damaged Items
Items lost or destroyed by neglect of the officer shall be replaced by the officer at his own
expense. The officer may obtain the clothing at any store of his choice.
Section 5: Bulletproof Vests
Each officer will be required to wear a bulletproof vest, issued by the Township which will be
treated as part of his uniform and will be required to be worn at all times by the officer while
on duty outside of the municipal building.

l DocNo=00~I S<l6B.I }

3

Article IV: Overtime/Working Hours
Section 1: Overtime
Overtime shall be voluntary, unless there is an emergency. Scheduled events are not to be
considered as an emergency. However, if all officers turn down the overtime request, then it
will be considered an emergency and the Chief of Police can assign the overtime.
A. The Township shall maintain an annual overtime list with the names of all officers
listed by seniority. Overtime will be compiled on the list. This compilation shall
include all of the number of hours that the officers worked overtime. Whenever an
officer is called for overtime, the officer with the least amount of overtime hours
compiled on the list for that year to date shall be the first officer called for overtime.
The number of hours shall be inclusive of all hours worked. If two or more officers
have the same amount of hours, then the most senior officer shall be called. The
overtime list shall not carry over from year to year and each year shall begin with a
new overtime list listing the officers in seniority order. For the purpose of
equalization of overtime, any person hired during the calendar year shall be treated as
if he or she has already accumulated the highest amount of overtime of any member
of the department. It is specifically understood that this is done solely for the purpose
of equalization and not for payment purposes.
B. The Township is not required to call an officer for overtime and no hours will be
included on the aforesaid list for those hours that could have been worked for any
officer who is the cause of overtime, has traded shifts, is on vacation, holiday pass
day, personal day, workmen compensation disability, sick leave or military leave
during the calendar week of overtime, or if acceptance of the overtime would cause
tripling out.
C. An officer shall be paid only for the time actually worked at the appropriate premium
rate. The four-hour call out guarantee shall apply only to call outs occurring more than
four hours prior to the start of the regularly scheduled shift. An officer called out at any
time shall be paid from the time he/she begins work, and not when he/she is called. An
officer called must report to work within one hour from the time of the call. If an
officer is not immediately available to respond to a call out, the Township may
proceed to call the next officer on the list.
D. A patrolperson shall receive time and one-half for time worked in excess of
eight (8) hours per day or forty (40) hours per week. Vacation time shall be
considered as time worked, but sick time and military leave will not be
considered as time worked.
E. Except to the extent that overtime will be compiled on the annual overtime
list, the aforesaid call-out procedure in Section l(A) above will not apply to
and the Township shall not be obliged to abide by such procedure
whenever:
I. It is determined at the sole discretion of the Township that a
specific patrolperson is desired for an assignment requiring specific
{DocNo~a04I546&.l )

4

skills or attributes; and/or
2. A patrolperson is undertaking or engaged in a continuing
assignment from a prior shift; and/or
3. An officer is held over from a regularly scheduled shift for less than
four (4) hours; an officer is called in prior to a regularly scheduled
shift for less than four (4) hours.
4. An emergency situation exists; and/or
5. A patrolperson is participating in any training or schooling
program;

I
I
I

F. Call-Outs: In the event it is necessary to call out a police officer, call-outs
shall be accomplished by calling the officer with the least amount of
accumulated overtime and continuing for all subsequent call-outs.
G. In the event that no full-time officer elects to work an overtime shift that is
deemed necessary by the Chief of Police, the Chief of Police shall have the
right to require the least senior police officer to work the shift in question.

Section 2: Working Hours
A. Except for good cause, the work schedule of the Collier Township Police Department shall be
five (5) consecutive days worked on the same shift with two (2) consecutive days off, except for
one "knock-out shift". The work week shall be forty (40) hours per week beginning at 0700,
Sunday morning and ending at 0659 the following Sunday morning. Each patrolperson shall be
required to work five (5) consecutive eight (8) hour days, forty (40) hours per week. The work
schedule will be posted at least one (1) week in advance, and in the event of change to the posted
schedule, twenty-four (24) hours notice will be given.
B. Generally, it has been the Township's policy to provide at least sixteen (16) hours off duty
during a shift change. Several factors, however, complicate this issue and do not always provide
that schedule flexibility to guarantee this benefit.
Such factors include:

1. Emergencies
2. Vacation, sick leave, military leave and injury compensation time
3. In-Service Training
4. Court Appearance
C. Shift Designation: There shall be three (3) shifts consisting of a 1st shift, commencing at
0700-1500 hours with the township having the ability to have one (1) officer start early and work
{DocNo=0041546&.
l }

5

I
I
I
I
I
I

from 0600-1400 hours; a 2 nd shift commencing at 1500-2300 hours with the township having the
ability to have one (1) officer start early and work from 1400-2200 hours; a 3rd
shift commencing at 2300-0700 hours with the township having the ability to start one (1)
officer early and work from 2200-0600 hours, The Township shall have the authority to create
up to two (2) overlap/swing shifts commencing at 1100-1900 hours and 1900-0300 hours. These
overlapping shifts will only be when the number of officers in the department cannot be evenly
distributed over the three shifts. In addition, to the overlapping shifts, the knockout shift may
also be utilized. The knock-out shift can be designated as any one of the shifts in a given work
week at the discretion of the Chief of Police or his designee. The knock-out shift officer will
work the shift posted during the bid process unless a manpower shortage occurs, then he may be
assigned to another shift. The knock-out shift will have fixed pass days and there shall be a
minimum of twelve (12) hours off between regular shifts.
D. Twelve Hour Rule: When an officer works any two (2) shifts with less than twelve (12) hours
off in between, he shall be compensated at the rate of time and one half ( 1 ½) of the hourly rate
for the hours worked within the twelve (12) hour period, beginning with the end of the first
shift. If the township elects to have an officer on each shift start early officers will have the
option to start early after they have selected their respective shifts and pass days based in order
of seniority. If no senior officer opts to start early then the junior officer shall start early with the
days off selected by their department seniority. Sergeants cannot start early if an early shift is on
the schedule .

. Section 3: Court Pay for Off-Duty Officer
A. Officers shall be paid by the attorney for the appropriate party for any appearances at civil
proceedings. If not paid by such attorney, the Township will make up the difference up to
one days pay or such number of days as are applicable if more than one day is required;
B. Off-Duty officers appearing at a criminal, Juvenile Court proceedings or Section 302 of the
Mental Health Act proceedings pursuant to a valid subpoena, shall receive a minimum of
four (4) hours pay at time and one-half;
C. Off-Duty officers who are receiving Workmen's Compensation benefits and are capable of
appearing at a juvenile or criminal court proceeding or Section 3 02 of the Mental Health Act
proceeding in response to a subpoena, will be assigned to light duty on days that they might
be required to appear at such proceedings;
D. Off-Duty officers shall receive time and one-half for magistrate hearings with a minimum of
two (2) hours being paid for magistrate hearings. The calculation of time actually spent shall
include travel time from the time the officer leaves the police station until the officer arrives
at court and also for his return travel time to the police station.
E. Court time shall not be considered as time worked for overtime calculations.

Section 4: Special Details
All special details shall be assigned by the Chief of Police and all contracts, or other payment
arrangements, for special details must be approved by the Township Manager.

{DocNo=0041546S.l )

6

I
I

I
I
I

Section 5: Departmental Meetings
Off-Duty officers attending departmental meetings scheduled by the Chief of Police shall be
paid two (2) hours minimum at the overtime rate unless the meeting occurs during the
officer's shift or occurs prior to the beginning or following the end of the officer's regular
shift, in which case, pay will be for the actual time of the meeting.
Section 6: Compensatory Time
An officer entitled to overtime may elect to accumulate compensatory time instead to a
maximum forty hours. Use of compensatory time shall be prohibited on days identified as
"holidays" in Article IV of this Agreement. An officer who terminates employment or retires
shall be to!igiblcto receive payment for unused accumulated comp time after separating from
employment.
Article V: Absent Time/Sick Leave
Section 1: Sick Leave
Probationary police officers of Collier Township shall be entitled to one-day sick leave for each
month worked during the first year of employment. After completion of one (1) year of
continuous employment, full-time police officers shall be entitled to a pro-rated amount of sick
leave for the remainder of the calendar year (based upon Eighteen (18) sick days per year).
Thereafter, Police Officers of Collier Township shall receive Eighteen (18) workdays per year
of sick leave and may accumulate up to 200 workdays of unused sick time.

II .

I

I

I

Extended sick leave may be authorized by the Board of Commissioners. All current sick time
must be used before extended sick leave can be requested. All vacation time must be used
before extended sick leave can be requested. Extended sick leave will be thirty (30) working
days. Extended sick leave may apply to any illness, injury or disability.
A police officer who is absent for more than three (3) consecutive working days may be
required to submit a doctor's certificate in order to gain compensation for the time lost due to
illness.
All full time, non-probationary officers of the Township who have used four or less days of
sick leave in a calendar year (January 1 through December 31) and have worked at minimum 5
days in the current calendar year shall be eligible to be reimbursed at base pay for unpsed sick
leave not to exceed five days. Eligibility shall be as follows:

Number of Used Sick Days Number of Days to be Paid
0

5

1

4
3
2
1
0

2

3
4
5 or more

Officers will be paid for unused sick leave as provided above on the second pay period of the
following year.
·
\D1xNo,,,0041546E.IJ

7

I

I
I

Section 2: Bereavement Leave
Collier Township will grant up to and including the following consecutive days absence with pay
to any full time police officer because of death as follows:
Ten (10) consecutive days absence with pay for the death of a spouse or child.
Four (4) consecutive days absence with pay for the death of a parent, parent
of spouse, grandchild, sister, brother, or grandparent.
Two (2) consecutive days absence with pay for the death of a grandparent
of a spouse, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, niece, nephew, aunt, or uncle.
One (1) day absence with pay for the death of an immediate cousin (1st).
All bereavement leave must be taken in conjunction with the death of the above
referenced family member.

Section 3: Emergency Leave
Officers shall be entitled to up to three (3) days emergency leave without pay in the event of a
medical exigency or emergency to a member of their immediate family as is defined in the
preceding paragraph, or any exigency compelling attendance during work hours.
Section 4: Personal Days/Holiday Pass Days
Each officer shall be entitled to receive eleven (11) "Holiday Pass Days" in each calendar year.
In addition, each officer shall also be entitled to receive two (2) "Personal Days" each calendar
year. A "Personal Day" will only be granted upon three (3) days prior notice, or when an
emergency arises and the Officer needs a day off without prior notice. These days may, or may
not, be granted by the Chief (or his designee) depending upon manpower needs and existing
conditions. Permission of the Chief (or his designee) shall not be unreasonably withheld.
Personal days shall not accrue, and if not used, are subject to compensation. Holiday Pass Days
shall not accrue, but if not used, up to two (2) Holiday Pass Days will be subject to
compensation.

An officer shall not be required to work on a holiday pass day/personal day, but will not receive

I

any additional compensation other than the normal salary on any holiday pass day/personal day
on which the officer does not work. In the event that an officer is required to appear for court
·and/or magistrate proceedings on a holiday pass day/personal day, such officer shall be
compensated in accordance with Article III Section 3. A procedure will be implemented for the
officers to select Holiday Pass Days/Personal Days on the basis of seniority, after all officers
have picked vacation.
Any officer working on New Years Day, Good Friday, Easter Sunday, Police Memorial Day
(May 15th), Memorial Day, Fourth of July, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas
Eve, and Christmas will be paid at the rate of time and one-half. In the event that any officer
shall work overtime on any of these days such officer shall be paid at the double time rate.
Holiday pay rates will be in effect for the shift that begins on the specific Holiday. For
example, Officers compensated for holiday pay on the Fourth of July will work 0700-1500 July
4, 1500-2300 July 4 1\ and 23-0700 July 5.

{DocNo=00415468.1
)

8

I
I

Shift and pass day selection for the following year will commence on October 1 of the
preceding year. Sergeants shall pick their shifts first, in order of sergeant seniority based on their
date of promotion, with no two sergeants permitted to pick the same shift. Sergeants will only
pick from the first, second or third shifts. Following the sergeant's shift selections, pass days
will be selected by department seniority based on date of hire. Following the selection of shifts
and pass days, vacation, holiday pass days and personal days shall be selected by department
seniority based on date of hire, subject to the provisions of Article VIII: Vacation, Section 2.
Each officer shall have two (2) working days to make his selection in order of seniority. If an
officer fails to make his selection in two (2) working days, the officer shall be last in the
selection process. If officers opt not to schedule all of their scheduled time off during this early
selection process, scheduled time off will be approved on a first come first serve basis.

Section 5: Long-Term Leave

If an officer fails to work a total of five (5) days in a calendar year, he or she will not be able to
receive auxiliary benefits set forth in this contract including: sick day buy back, clothing
allowance and weapons purchase program.

I
I
I
I

Article VI: Vacation
1. The vacation policy of the Township of Collier with respect to full-time Police
Officers shall be as follows:
One (1 ) week vacation after completing One (1) full year of service;
Two (2) weeks vacation after completing Two (2) full years of service;
Three (3) weeks of vacation after completing Seven (7) full years of service;

I

Four (4) weeks vacation after completing Twelve (12) full years of service;
Five (5) weeks of vacation after completing Seventeen (17) years of service and;
Six (6) weeks of vacation after completing Twenty-Two (22) years of service.

I

Vacation shall be selected on seniority by the police officers, excluding the Chief of Police. If
less than one ( 1) week of vacation is taken by a patrol person, the request for such partial
vacation must be submitted to the Township Manager and the Chief at least one (1) week before
the scheduled vacation day; in all other cases, the vacation will be taken in allotments of no less
than one week at a time. All vacation time will be selected before personal days.
In the event that an officer is required to appear for a court and/or magistrate proceeding on a
vacation day, such officer shall be compensated in accordance with Article IV Section 3.
2.
One (1) officer per shift shall be permitted off on a vacation day, personal day, or
holiday pass day per day. The chief shall allow additional officers to be off on any of the
{DocNo~00415468.l }

9

holidays listed in Article V, Section 4 provided that the grant of this additional day does not
result in overtime.

Article VII: Pension

I
I

Section 1: Pension Provisions
The Township shall cause the following benefits to be added to, or changed in, the Township's
police pension plan:
A. A survivors pension shall be added which shall be payable in the event of the
death of an officer who is eligible to receive or is receiving retirement benefits
under the plan. In such event, the spouse of the deceased officer, or, ifno spouse
survives, then the child or children of the officer who are under the age of
eighteen, shall during the spouse's lifetime or until reaching the age of eighteen
in the case of the child or children, receive a monthly income calculated at the
rate of fifty (50%) percent of the monthly retirement benefit which the officer
was receiving or would have been receiving had he/she been retired at the time of
death in accordance with the terms and conditions of Act 600.
B. Police pension benefits will be calculated upon the officer's total W-2 earnings

(50% of average oflast 36 months of employment); provided however, any lump
sum payments received upon retirement shall not be included in the calculation
of monthly pension benefits, except to the extent that said payments are for
benefits which were earned during the calculation period, pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Auditor General Bulletin No. 2001-01, as amended. This provision
will remain in effect so long as the Township does not receive an adverse audit
finding or recommendation from the Pennsylvania Auditor General's Office
concerning the method of calculating police officer pension benefits. If the
Township receives such an audit finding or recommendation, then the provisions
of this paragraph will be reopened for negotiations in accordance with Act 111 of
1968. All outstanding grievances and unfair labor practice charges regarding
pension issues are settled by the above and will be withdrawn.

I
I
I
I

I

C. The Township agrees to implement a DROP Pension Provision in Accordance
with Exhibit "C" and Attachment 1 (Memo dated March 27, 2006) which are
attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference.
D. The Township agrees to implement the Act 24 early retirement pension benefit,
which is an actuarially reduced benefit, upon the completion of 20 years of
service.
E. A service increment of $100.00 per month for every year of service over 25
years shall be added. This will be increased pursuant to Act 89 so that $500.00
per month is provided after 3 0 years of service.
F. Interest on funds withdrawn from the pension fund whenever an officer leaves and
withdraws the funds out of the fund will be increased to six (6%) percent simple.
{DocNo=00415468.l}

10

G. Pension Contributions will be calculated in accordance with this paragraph.

I
I

During each year of this agreement, the Tovmship agrees to have a calculation
performed to determine the necessary minimum municipal obligation for the
succeeding year as required by Act 205. In the event that the calculation determines that
a contribution is necessary to be made by the Police Department, then, the contribution
shall be deducted from the total wages of the police department, but not to exceed eight
percent (8%) of the total wages of the officers, and provided further that the amount
of state aid under Act 205, payable to the Township, representing units for uniformed
personnel, shall have been included in the calculation. In the event that the
calculation determines that no contribution or a contribution of less than five percent
(5%) is required, then the Township shall likewise require an actuarial study to be
made to authorize a reduction in the amount of the contribution to be made by the
Police Department for each succeeding year, but no less, of course, than zero percent
(0%). In addition, when the actuarial study is commissioned by the Township to
determine the actuarial soundness of the plan with respect to Police contributions to
the Pension Fund, the Police may also inquire of the actuary to determine what, if
any, additional benefits are available to the Police Officers of the Township, Under
Act 600 and any amendment thereto, and such additional benefits as may be
actuarially feasible, as determined by the plan's actuary, shall be implemented by the
Township and such benefits shall be provided to the Police, In the event that
additional legislation shall be enacted authorizing additional benefits to Police
Officers from the Police Pension Plan, and such benefits are authorized by statute
without actuarial study, the Township shall provide such benefits to the Police; in the
event an actuarial study is required, the Township agrees to direct an actuarial study
be conducted to determine the feasibility of payment of such new benefits. In
addition, if case law, as determined by the highest appellate court in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall determine that benefits are available to the
Police Officers of the Township which benefits are not presently available as
construed under Act 600, and such benefits are actuarially feasible, as determined by
the plan's actuary, then the Township shall implement such benefits and provide them
to the police, In the event that a difference in opinion shall exist between the Police
and the Township regarding the interpretation of such judicial decisions, or of any
statutes, which may be enacted as indicated hereto, then the decision shall be referred
to the Township. Any disagreement relating to the interpretation may be referred to an
arbitrator by following the grievance procedure set out in this Agreement. The cost of
actuarial studies and other expenses associated with the study (costs, etc.) but
excluding legal fees, and fees of any actuary not employed by the Tovmship shall be
paid from the Pension Plan.
For the purpose stated herein, actuarial studies shall be conducted by the actuary
employed by the Township. The term, "actuarially sound" or "actuarially feasible"
shall be given the same meaning and interpretation as has been in effect in the past as
those terms are historically and customarily determined by the plan actuary and shall
have the customary meaning applied by actuaries for these purposes. Nothing
contained herein shall be construed so as to require contributions to the pension plan
by the Township from General or other funds, except the funds allocated to the plan
under Act 205 and which shall be allocated by the Tovmship in accordance with the
{DocNo~0041546B.l)

11

provisions of Act 205, subject to the foregoing provisions. If contributions should be
required from the Township, the benefit sought shall be considered actuarially nonfeasible.

* It is understood and agreed that all of the additions and changes in this paragraph in
(A) through (G) shall be administered in compliance with Act 600 and governing interpretations
thereof and in the event of inconsistencies or contradictions between the terms and conditions
hereof and such Act 600 or governing interpretations thereof, Act 600 and the governing
interpretation thereof shall prevail and the Township shall not be obligated to administer such
police pension plan in a manner inconsistent or contradictory to Act 600 and any governing
interpretations thereof.
H. The Township shall take any and all necessary action to amend the Township's
Police Pension Ordinance to incorporate the provisions herein.
Section 2: Unused Sick Leave Pay
Upon retirement, the Township shall pay the retiring Police Officer for all unused sick leave
(maximum of 150 days) with said payment to be calculated upon fifty (50) percent of the
Officer's base salary at the time ofretirement without regard to seniority and/or overtime.

I
I,

Section 3: Post-Retirement Health Care Insurance
Retired police officers who are entitled to receive health insurance coverage shall be covered by
the same insurance plan as active police officers. Effective January 1, 2006, individual health
insurance will be provided to the retiree only, until the retiree is age eligible for Medicare. The
Township shall not be responsible for the cost of any health insurance for the retiree's spouse or
•dependents; however, the retiree will be permitted to pay for any additional coverage for his
spouse or eligible dependents, if permitted by the health insurance carrier. If other health
insurance is available to the retiree from another source, there will be a non-duplication of
benefits. The retiree can choose the Township coverage or the·other available coverage, but
cannot have both coverages. If the retiree waives Township coverage, the retiree is not entitled
to any payment for such waiver. If active police officers begin to make contributions to their
health insurance, retirees shall make the same contribution as active employees. If a police
officer chooses to be covered by health insurance from another source, the police officer will be
entitled to opt back into the Township's plan based upon a qualifying event or during the annual
enrollment period

If any provisions of this Section, or any application of this Section to any employee/retiree or
group of employees/retirees is held to be contrary to law, then such provision or application
shall not be deemed valid and subsisting, except to the extent permitted by law, but all other
provisions or applications shall continue in full force and effect. It is further agreed that within
ten (10) days of receipt of notification of court action or another impartial adjudication,
negotiations shall commence, during which a new agreement on such matter shall be reached.
All understandings and agreements reached under this procedure shall be reduced to writing,
signed by each party and made a part of the Collective Bargaining Agreement. In the event
agreement is not reached within twenty (20) days after negotiations have. begun, and no time
extension is mutually agreed upon, the matter shall be referred to binding arbitration pursuant
to the grievance procedure using the procedures of the American Arbitration Association for
{DocNo=004I546lL1 }

12

arbitrator selection. The arbitrator shall be empowered to mediate/arbitrate a replacement
benefit whose cost does not exceed the cost of providing health insurance on retirement to
each employee/retiree as delineated in this Section.
Employees hired on or after January 1, 2017 are not entiiled to post-retirement health care
insurance.

I

Section 4: Pension Board Members
One police officer who is elected by a majority of the police officers shall be
appointed to the Pension Board by the Commissioners, subject to the rules and regulations of
the Pension Board. The Township agrees to reactivate the Advisory Pension Board in
accordance with existing Township ordinances. The fifth member of the Pension Board shall be
a Collier Township Police Officer.
Section 5: Post-Retirement Death Benefit Insurance
The Township shall provide tci each officer of the Township a paid-up life insurance policy on
the date of any such Officer's retirement, in the face amonnt of $10,000.00, the premiums for
which shall be paid by the Township.

Article VIII: Miscellaneous
I .

I

Section 1: Personal Vehicle Reimbursement
In the event that any Police Officer is required by the Township to use his or her personal
vehicle on the business of the Township of Collier including to and from Court or Magistrate
hearings or any training or schooling which has first been approved by the Chief of Police of
Collier, they shall, upon filing a written verification, be paid a mileage allowance at the rate set
forth by the Internal Revenue Service, amended annually, per mile. The mileage reimbursed, to
the extent it is available under this section, shall be calculated from the point of departure to the
training or Court location. In addition, such police officer shall be reimbursed for parking
expenses, properly receipted. Personal vehicles shall be excluded from patrol duties. It is
recognized that the Chief of Police may require an officer to utilize a Township vehicle, in
which case the officer shall not be reimbursed for mileage but shall be eligible for parking
expense reimbursement pursuant to this Section.
Section 2: Residency Restrictions
Officers must reside in a location that enables them to respond to the Township within one hour
travel time from their residences ..
Section 3: Jury Duty
Officers shall be permitted off duty in order to serve when summoned to a legal jury under the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. When serving on a jury, an officer's regular
compensation will be reduced in an amount equal to monies received as "Jury Pay".
Section 4: Off-Duty Employment
Off duty officers may work for parties other than the Township without any compensation or
benefits from the Township. Officers may wear their uniforms for this outside work detail only
iDocNo..00415468.1)

13

with written approval of the Chief of Police. Officers are not required to obtain the written
approval of the Chief of Police in order to wear their uniform for outside work details
whenever the outside work detail is for the Chartiers Valley School District within the
boundaries of the Township of Collier. Prior to engaging in any such work for other parties,
the officer shall notify the Chief of Police, In the event that the Township in its sole discretion
shall determine to enter into a contract with another party to provide uniformed police
services, the officers who work such a detail are entitled to be paid by the Township and also
receive benefits from the Township.

I

I

Section 5: False Arrest Insurance
The Township will cause to be purchased; false arrest insurance coverage to be applicable to
each patrol person provided the arrest is made while on the business of the Township of Collier.
Section 6: Seniority Provision
Seniority shall prevail in accordance with the existing agreement on scheduling of vacation,
holidays, work schedule and pass days. Except as otherwise provided by law, seniority shall
not prevail over any other issues than those enumerated herein.
Seniority will be determined by date of hire for "Department Seniority" and date of promotion
for "Sergeant Seniority." An employee shall not accrue seniority during any period of unpaid
absence, .

Section 7: Life Insurance
The Township of Collier will pay the total premium for $65,000.00 term group life insurance
coverage per officer.
Section 8: Past Practice Provision
All current past practices not affected by the terms and conditions hereof shall continue in
full force and effect.
Section 9: Health Care Insurance
The Township and the Association agree to change the health care insurance plan to the Municipal
Benefits Services (MBS) PPO 500-RX Option 1 as soon as practical. A copy of the MBS PPO
S00"RXOption 1 option plan summary is attached as Exhibit "E".

I

Beginning January I, 2019, officers shall pay 9% of the cost of the coverage selected monthly
throughout the life of the agreement (2019-2023).
The Township agrees to notify officers of any change to the current healthcare coverage at the
time the information is received by the Township.
Each officer shall be permitted to decline his health care insurance provided he is covered
under another plan and that officer shall be paid fifty (50%) percent of the monthly cost of
coverage. Any officer electing to decline health care coverage may reinstate their health care
coverage provided by the Employer at any time permitted by the insurance carrier. Also
provided is dental coverage and vision care.

{DocNo=00415468.l j

14

The Township will have the ability to change health care carriers or plans provided equivalent
coverage is available. Equivalent, in this context, will not mean exactly the same. Rather,
equivalent shall mean a plan having, when compared as a whole, benefits which are equal to or
better than the current coverage. Prior to switching health care plans or providers, the Township
shall issue notice to the employees; provided that the Township retains the right to unilaterally
change health care plans or providers following such notice, subject to the Union's right to grieve
the Township's determination of equivalent or better coverage The Collier Township Wage and
Policy Unit agrees to cooperate with the Township concerning the review of alternate health care
carriers or plans.

I
I

If the employer receives notice or information indicating that its health care plan costs will
subject the plan to the Affordable Care Act's "Cadillac Tax" excise tax, the employer will give
the Union written notice of that fact and the parties will immediately negotiate changes in the
plan design, plan and/or plan carrier in order to avoid the imposition of the tax. If no agreement
is reached within fourteen (14) days of the employer's written notice to the Union regarding this
issue, then the parties will proceed to an expedited interest arbitration proceeding in accordance
with Act 111. The sole purpose for that expedited arbitration proceeding will be for the
arbitration panel to modify the plan, plan design and/or plan carrier in order to eliminate the
exposure to the Cadillac Tax. The decision of the arbitration panel on this issue shall be issued
within thirty (30) calendar days of appointment of the neutral arbitrator.
When a full-time police officer is on unpaid leave of absence as a result of a non-workrelated
medical condition, the Township will continue to provide health insurance, dental insurance and
vision insurance coverages during the period of the unpaid leave of absence, for a maximum of
eighteen (18) months.

I

I

Section 10: Voluntary Physical Agility Test
A $500.00 annual bonus will be paid to any full-time police officer who voluntarily takes and
passes a physical agility test. The physical agility test will be determined by the Township.
The Township agrees to discuss the physical agility test with the Association prior to
implementation. The failure of any officer to take or pass the voluntary physical agility test
will not be considered negative or be grounds for any disciplinary action against the police
officer.
Section 11: Dues Deduction
Any officer who, on the effective date of the Agreement, has joined the Association and
authorized dues deduction, or who in the future joins the Association and authorizes dues
deduction must continue the dues deduction authorization and remain a member for the duration
of the Agreement with the provision that any such employee may resign from the Association
and revoke the dues deduction authorization during a period of fifteen days prior the expiration
date of the Agreement.
The Township shall deduct regular initiation fees and monthly dues from the pay of officers
covered by the Agreement upon receipt from the Association of individual written authorization
cards voluntarily executed by an officer for that purpose and bearing his/her signature. The dues
and assessment shall be deducted at the rate of one-twelfth of the total assessment from each
paycheck on the last day of each month and shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of the Collier
Township Police Association representing the Police Department.
1DacNo=004l 546B.l )

15

Section 12: Police Officers Bill of Rights
A Police Officer's Bill of Rights is attached hereto and incorporated herein as Exhibit "B".
Section 13: Training
All police officers shall be entitled to attend a minimum of sixty (60) hours of training per year
in addition to mandatory MPOETC required training. All training must be approved by the
Chief of Police or the Township Manager if the Chief is not available. The Chief of Police (or
the Township Manager) may deny training ifit causes overtime. Time spent on training will be
considered to be the police officer's normal workday, if the training is 6 hours or more
(including travel time). By mutual agreement of the Township and the police officer, the police
officer may be paid overtime for training instead of considering it to be the officer's normal
work day, when training is six hours or more. The knockout officer may be used to replace a
police officer who is attending training. Any issues or concerns relating to training will be
addressed by the Public Safety Committee of the Township Board of Commissioners.
Section 14: Civil Rights Violation Insurance
The Township will attempt to provide Civil Rights Violation Insurance Protection for its Police
Officers, and agrees to provide such protection, provided however, that the cost for such
additional coverage shall not exceed the sum of Three Thousand ($3000.00) Dollars annually.
Section 15: Part-Time Officers
The Township is recognized to have the ability to hire part-time officers. No part-time officers
will be utilized when a full-time officer is furloughed or when the effect of hiring a part-time
officer is to reduce overtime opportunities for full-time officers below 1984 levels.

I

A. All regular part-time officers will be hired through Civil Service and will be subject to the
Civil Service Rules and Regulations.
B. Hourly wages will be equal to ninety (90%) percent the entry rate of the latest full-time
officer hired. No shift differential or longevity pay will apply to part-time officers. All
regular part-time officers shall be paid time and one-half in excess of eight (8) consecutive
hours worked in a day.
C. All emergency overtime shall not be offered to part-time officers except if full-time
officers are not readily available, or if part-time employees are needed to supplement a
full-time work force.
D. Regular part-time police officers shall be scheduled at the discretion of the Chief provided
that total overtime hours available for full-time officers does not drop below 300 hours of
overtime opportunities for full-time officers. In addition, no regular part-time police officer
may be used at any time a full-time police officer is on lay-off.
E. Newly hired part-time officers shall be regarded as probationary employees for the first
twelve (12) months of their employment.
F. Regular part-time employees may be used for vacation replacement and replacement of
employees who are on paid or unpaid leave.
{DocNo=00415468I }

16

G. The Township will schedule part-time officers no more than sixty (60) hours in a pay
period except in emergencies as designated by the Chief of Police.
H. The Chief of Police shall have the authority to utilize part-time officers in the best interest of
the Township without regard to seniority among the part-time officers.

I. Part-time officers shall accrue no seniority and will not be eligible for promotion to ranking
positions. However, should the Board of Commissioners elect to hire a new full-time
officer, the Board may consider hiring an officer from a current civil service list or by
officially appointing an existing part-time officer to the position,
J, The Township will provide uniforms and equipment required by the Township at Township
expense. The Township will also replace at its expense any uniform or equipment item
damaged through no fault of the officer. Uniforms and equipment shall remain the property
of the Township and must be returned upon separation from employment for any reason.

l

K. All regular part-time officers shall receive holiday pay if scheduled to work a holiday.
Holiday pay shall consist of time and one-half for the hours worked.
L. Part-time officer required, when off duty, to attend Civil or Criminal Court as a part of their

duty will be paid at their regular hourly rate of pay for the actual hours required in Court,
with a minimum of two (2) hours.

I

I

M. Any fringe benefits normally reserved for full-time officers that are not set forth herein will
not be available to part-time officers.
N. If training is mandated by the State or another governing body, all expenses shall be paid by
the Township.
0. Part-time police officers do not get paid overtime wages for any work, including special
details, unless the part-time officer actually works more than forty (40) hours in a given
workweek.

Section 18: Management Rights

The Employer reserves all rights and powers conferred upon it by the Constitutions and laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and of the United States, except as expressly limited by a
specific provision of this Agreement. It is understood and agreed that the Employer, at its sound
discretion, shall have and retain, solely and exclusively, in accordance with applicable laws, all
managerial responsibilities including, but not limited to, the right to manage all operations; to
determine the mission, purposes, objectives, policies, programs and functions, standards of
service, and organizational structure of the employer; to establish, amend or modify its overall
budget; to establish, change, combine or abolish job classifications or the job content of any
classification; to reprimand, suspend, discharge or otherwise relieve employees from duty for
lack of work or other legitimate reasons; to hire, promote, retire, demote, transfer, layoff and
recall employees to work; to plan, direct, control and regulate the utilization of technology and
the use of machinery, equipment and other property of the Employer; to introduce new or
{DocNo~OG4!546S I )

17

improved research, development and services; to determine and from time-to-time re-determine
the methods, processes, and materials to be employed by the Employer; to determine the
number and types of employees required and to assign work to such employees in accordance
with the operation needs of the Employer, and direct the workforce. Matters of inherent
managerial policy are reserved exclusively to the Employer.
The listing of specific rights in this Agreement is not intended, nor should it be considered to be
restrictive or a waiver of any rights of management not listed and not specifically surrendered
herein whether or not such rights have been exercised by the Employer in the past. Further, all
inherent managerial rights, management functions and prerogatives which the Employer has not
expressly modified or restricted by a specific provision of this Agreement are retained and vested
exclusively in the Employer_
Section 17: Drug and Alcohol Policy
Officers shall continue to be subject to the Township's drug and alcohol policy.
Section 18: Secondary Employment
Officers must receive approval for secondary employment in accordance with Township Policy.
Section 19: Return To Work Requirements
Officers who have been off work for more than one (1) calendar year shall be required to take
and pass a physical examination and capacity test prior to returning to work. This test will be the
same test new officers are required to take prior to employment. The test will be administered by
the Township's medical services provider.

Article IX: Grievance Procedure
1.
It is the policy of the Township of Collier to encourage a harmonious and cooperative
relationship between its employees and to resolve employee grievances in accordance with fair
and orderly procedure.
Definition: A grievance is a dispute concerning the interpretation, application, or
alleged violation of a specific term or provision of this agreement or past practices, or any oral
or written agreement. It shall also include matters of discipline and no Officer shall be
disciplined, suspended, discharged, reprimanded, reduced in salary or compensation without just
cause.

2.
Step 1: An employee with a grievance shall write a letter to the Chief of Police, with
copies to the President of the Board of Commissioners and the Chairman of the Public Safety
Committee within thirty (30) days of the event or circumstance from which the grievance has
arisen or is based or within thirty (30) days of the day whenever the employee knows of such
event or circumstance, whichever is later. The Chief of Police shall attempt to resolve the
grievance to the mutual satisfaction of the employee and Township within five (5) calendar days
(DocNo=004!5468. \ }

18

of its presentation. The Chief of Police shall report his/her decision to the employee in writing. If
the employee does not proceed with his/her grievance to the second step within the time limits
prescribed in the following paragraph and no extension of time is granted in writing, the
grievance shall be considered to be satisfactorily resolved.
3.
Step 2: If the grievant is not satisfied with the disposition of his/her grievance at the first
step, or if the Chief of Police fails to report his/her decision in writing, the grievant must reduce
the grievance to writing and submit the grievance to the Public Safety Committee of the Board of
Commissioners within seven (7) calendar days after receiving a decision at the first step or
within no less than seven (7) calendar days or more than fourteen (14) calendar days after the
grievance was presented at the first step. Submission of the grievance to the Public Safety
Committee shall constitute a second step appeal. The Public Safety Committee, within thirty (30)
calendar days after receiving the appeal, may hold a hearing with employees and/or Police. The
Public Safety Committee within fifteen (15) calendar days following the hearing shall give the
employee or Police a written decision. If the employee does not proceed with his/her grievance
to the third step within the time limits prescribed in the following paragraph and no extension of
time is granted, the grievance shall be considered to be satisfactorily resolved.
4.
Step 3: If the Public Safety Committee for any reason should fail to hold the hearing
within thirty (30) calendar days after receiving the appeal or fail to render a decision within
fifteen (15) calendar days following the last date for a hearing, then, if the employee desires to
proceed with the grievance to the third step, he/she shall within fifteen (15) calendar days file a
written grievance with the Secretary of the Board of Commissioners of the Township of
Collier.
The grievance shall be sent to the Office of the Secretary, Tovmship of Collier, 2418 Hilltop
Road, Presto, PA 15142 by certified mail, return receipt requested and request that the Board of
Commissioners of the Township of Collier consider a third step appeal.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Collier must, within thirty (30) calendar days
after receiving the written appeal, hold a public hearing at which the employee and/or Police may
present the grievance.
The Board of Commissioners of the Township of Collier within thirty (30) calendar days
following the hearing, shall give the employee and police a written decision.

If the employee does not proceed with the grievance to the fourth step within the same time
limit prescribed in the following paragraph, and no extension of time is granted in writing,
then the grievance is considered to be satisfactorily resolved.
If the Board of Commissioners of the Township of Collier fail to hold the hearing within the
time limits set forth above and render a decision within the time limits set above, and no
extension of time is granted in writing, the grievance may be appealed to arbitration in
accordance with Step 4 of the Agreement within thirty (30) calendar days after the date a
decision should have been received.
5.
Step 4: If the grievant is not satisfied with the disposition of the grievance at the third
step, the grievant may appeal to arbitration within thirty (3 0) calendar days after receiving a
IDocNo;004 I5468.I l

19

I
I
I

decision at the third step. A request for arbitration may be initiated by the grievant serving upon
the Township a notice in writing of an intent to proceed to arbitration. Upon receipt of a notice
requesting arbitration, the parties shall meet to select an arbitrator or request a panel of three (3)
prospective arbitrators from the American Arbitration Association in accordance with the
requirements of Act 111. The arbitrator shall have no power or authority to add to, subtract
from or modify the provision of an Award or Agreement in arriving at a decision of the issue
presented and shall confine his decision solely to the application and interpretation of an Award,
Agreement or Past Practice. The decision or Award shall be final and binding. Each party shall
bear the cost of preparing and presenting his own case and the costs and expenses of the neutral
arbitrator shall be shared by the parties.
A grievance which effects a substantial number of employees may be initially presented by the
Wage and Policy Committee at Step 2 of the grievance procedure.

I
I'

A grievance may be withdrawn by the grievant at any time and the withdrawal of any grievance
shall not be prejudicial to the positions taken by the parties as they relate to that grievance or any
future grievance.

'

I
I
I.

I

I
I

(DocNo~IJ415468.1 }

20

Exhibit "A"
Full-Time Police Officer Initial Uniform/Equipment Issue

I
I

I .

I

1. Five (5) Navy Blue Long Sleeve Uniform Shirts
2. Five (5) Navy Blue Short Sleeve Uniform Shirts
3. Five (5) Navy Blue Uniform Pants (Blackjack Pocket Optional)
4. Two (2) Navy Blue Uniform Ties
5. One (1) Navy Blue LAPD Style Hat w/ Silver Hat Band
6. One (1) Black Fur Hat
7. One (1) Navy Blue Spring Coat (Waist Length)
8. One (1) Navy Blue Winter Coat (Waist Length)
9. One (1) Black Wool Sweater
I 0. One (1) Reversible Rain Coat
11. One (1) Pair Black Rubber Slush Boots
12. One (1) Pair Black Boots or• Shoes (Low Cut, Chukka Style or Boots)
13. One (1) Pair Handcuffs
14. One (1) Soft Armor Protective Vest (If Requested by Officer in Writing)
15. Two (2) Soft Armor Protective Vest Carriers
16. One (1) Nightstick (Straight Baton or Expandable Baton)
17. Five (5) Pairs Uniform Socks
18. One (1) Silver Plated Nameplate
19. One(!) Whistle
20. One (1) Silver Whistle Chain
21. One (1) Uniform Badge
22. One (1) Hat Badge
23. One (1) Off-Duty Badge
24. One (1) Outer Garment Badge
25. One (1) Blackjack
26. One (1) Off-Duty Badge Case
27. Twenty-Six (26) Department Patches (Provided by Collier Twp. PD)
28. One (1) Canister Pepperspray
29. One (1) Silver Tie Clip
30. One (1) Metal Citation Holder
31. One (1) Metal Clipboard
32. One (1) Pair of Leather Gloves
33. One (1) Reversible Rain Cap Cover for LAPD Hat
34. Complete Set of Duty Gear to Include:
A. One (1) Holster for Authorized Duty Weapon

B.
C.
D.
E.

One (1) Handcuff Case
One (I) Double Magazine Pouch or Double Speedloader Pouch
One (I) Pepperspray Pouch
One (1) Baton Ring or Expandable Baton Holder

{DocNo-'00<ll 5<168.1)

21

Exhibit "A" Continued
Full-Time Police Officer Initial Uniform/Equipment Issue

F.
G.
H.
I.
J.
K.
L.

One (1) Key Holder
Four (4) Belt Keepers
One (1) Latex Glove Pouch
One (1) Trouser Belt
One (1) Duty Belt
One (I) Silver Duty Belt Buckle if Duty Belt has Buckle System
One (1) Radio Pouch

35. Two (2) Handcuff Keys
36. Duty Ammunition for Authorized Duty Weapon
**All Shirts, Coats and Sweaters Shall have one (1) official Collier Township Police
Department patch sewn on each sleeve.

I

I

I .

I

{DocNo-'004\5468.1)

22

Exhibit "B"
Police Officer Bill of Rights

I. When an anonymous' complaint is made against a Police Officer and no corroborative
evidence is obtained, the complaint shall be classified as unfounded.
2. When any citizen complaint is filed greater than ninety (90) calendar days after the date of
the alleged event complained of, which if true, could not lead to a criminal charge, such
complaint shall be classified as unfounded and the accused employee shall not be required
to 'submit a written report, but he shall be notified orally or in writing of such claim.
3. A Police Officer, whether a subject or witness, must be informed of the nature of the
interrogation at the outset of the interrogation.
4. If the interrogated police officer writes a written statement, a transcript is taken, or
mechanical record made, a copy of same must be given to the interrogated Police Officer,
without cost, upon request.
5. If any Police Officer under interrogation is under arrest, or is placed under arrest as a result
of the interrogation, he shall be completely informed of all his rights.

I
I
I
f

I

I

6. At the request of any Police Officer under interrogation, he shall have the right to be
represented by counsel of his choice and/or an F.O.P. representative who shall be present at
all times during the interrogation. The interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonable
time until representation can be obtained.
7. Unless agreed to by the Officer, the municipality shall not make any public comment on the
reason for any disciplinary action brought against the Officer, except as may be required by
law relating to disciplinary proceedings and unless the Police Officer elects to make public
comment.
8. A police officer will be shown a copy of any written complaint against the police at the
time of interrogation.

I

I.

I

I

(DocNo=00415468. l }

23

Exhibit "C"
Drop Pension Benefit Provision

Section 1: Definitions
DROP: The Deferred Retirement Option Plan is created as an optional form of benefit
under the existing Collier Township Pension Plan.
DROP Account: A separate ledger account created to accumulate the DROP pension benefit for
a DROP participant.
Member: A full-time Collier Township police officer covered by the Plan.
Participant: A member who is eligible for normal retirement and who has elected to participate
in the DROP program.
Plan: The Collier Township Police Pension Plan adopted pursuant to Act 600.

.

Section 2: DROP Provisions

I

A. Eligibility. Effective January 1, 2006, members of the Collier Tmvnship Police Association
bargaining unit that have not retired prior to the implementation of the DROP program,
may enter into the DROP on the first day of any month following the attainment of age 55
and the completion of 25 or more years of credited service with Collier Township.

I

i
I
I

I

B. Written Election. An eligible member of the Plan electing to participate in the DROP
program must complete and execute a "DROP Election Form" prepared by the Collier
Township manager and/or the plan administrator, which shall evidence the Member's
participation in the DROP program, and document the Participant's rights and obligations
under the DROP. The form must be signed by the Member and the Chief Administrative
Officer of the Plan and submitted to Collier Township, within 30 days of the date on which
the Member wishes the DROP election to be effective. The DROP Election Form shall
include an irrevocable notice to the Township of Collier by the Member, that the Member
shall terminate from employment with Collier Township Police Department effective on a
specific date three (3) years from the effective date of the DROP election. In addition, all
retirement documents required by the Collier Township Police Pension Plan Administrator
must be filed and presented to the Collier Tovmship Commissioners for approval of
retirement and commencement of the monthly pension benefit. Once the retirement
application has been approved by the Commissioners, it shall become irrevocable.
After a Member enters the DROP program, contributions to the pension plan by the
Participant and the Township will cease, and the amount of the monthly benefits w1ll be
frozen except for any applicable cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) increases awarded to all
pension recipients.
Members shall be advised to consult a Tax Advisor, of their choice, prior to considering
the DROP program, as there may be serious tax implications and/or consequences to
participating in the DROP program.
{DocNo=00415468,\}

24

C. Limitation on Pension Accrual. After the effective date of the DROP election, the Participant
shall no longer earn or accrue additional years of continuous service for pension purposes

I
I
I
I
I
I

I

I
I

I
I

D. Benefit Calculation. For all Plan purposes, continuous service of a Member participating in
the DROP program shall remain as it existed on the effective date of commencement of
participation in the DROP program. Service thereafter shall not be recognized or used for the
calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the Collier Township Police Pension
Plan. The average monthly pay of the Member for pension calculation purposes shall remain
as it existed on the effective date of commencement of participation in the DROP program.
Earnings or increases in earnings thereafter shall not be recognized or used for the calculation
or determination of any benefits payable by the Plan. The pension benefit payable to the
Participant shall increase only as a result of Cost-of Living Adjustments (COLAs), effective
on or after the date of the Member's participation in the DROP program.

E. Payments to DROP Account. The monthly retirement benefits that would have been
payable had the member elected to cease employment and receive a normal retirement
benefit shall, upon the Member commencing participation in the DROP program, be
credited on the first day of each month into a separate ledger account established by the
Plan Administrator to track and accumulate the Participant's monthly pension benefits. This
account shall be designated the DROP accatuit. The DROP Account shall not contain a
guaranteed interest rate. The account shall be managed by the Plan Administrator pursuant
to the same fiduciary obligations and principles applicable to management of the municipal
pension plans. The Plan Administrator may allow Participants to select certain types of
investments from an available list of choices. Frequency of investment changes will be at
the discretion of the Plan Administrator. All earnings credited to the DROP account will be
included in the final cash settlement.
·
F. Early Termination. A Participant may withdraw from the DROP program at any time and
effectuate a complete retirement from service. No penalty shall be imposed for early
termination of DROP participation. However, the Participant shall not be permitted to make
any withdrawals from the DROP Account until DROP participation has ended. During the
last year of DROP participation, if a DROP Participant becomes disabled for a period in
excess of 60 consecutive days, regardless of whether the disability is service related, he/she
shall be deemed to have applied for early termination of DROP participation and will then
terminate employment with the Township and receive his/her normal retirement benefits.

G. Payout. Upon the termination date set forth in the DROP Election Form or on such date as
the Participant withdraws or is terminated from the DROP program, if earlier, the normal
retirement benefits payable to the Participant or the Participant's beneficiary, if applicable,
shall be paid directly to the Participant or beneficiary and shall no longer be credited to the
DROP Account. Within thirty (30) days following actual termination of a Participant's
employment with Collier Township, the accumulated balance in the DROP Account shall be
paid to the Participant in a single lump-sum payment. Such payment shall be made either in
cash, subject to any federal withholding as may be required, or as a direct rollover to an
Individual Retirement Account (IRA). If the Participant selects the rollover option, he or she
must also submit the appropriate paperwork from the IRA custodian within twenty (20) days
following termination.
H Death. If a Participant dies before the DROP Account balance is paid, the Participant's
beneficiary under Act 600 shall have the same rights as the Participant to withdraw the
DROP Account balance. The monthly benefit credited to the Participant's DROP Account
during the month of the Participant's death shall be the final monthly benefit for DROP
{DocNa=00415468.l

l

25

participation.

I. Killed-In-Service Survivor Benejit. If a Participant is killed in service, the Participant's
beneficiaries under Act 600 shall be entitled to apply for and receive a recalculation for
payment of survivor benefits at 100% of the Participant's salary as fixed at the date of
retirement.
J. A DROP Participant is not eligible for promotion to Sergeant.
K. Amendment. Any amendments to the DROP Ordinance shall be consistent with the

provisions covering deferred retirement option plans set forth in any applicable collective
bargaining agreement or state or federal law, and shall be binding upon all fnture
participants and upon all Participants who have balances in their DROP Accounts.

Section 3: Effective Date
The effective date of the DROP program will be January 1, 2006.
Section 4: Severability
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held to
be unconstitutional or illegal, the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this Ordinance
shall not be affected thereby. It is hereby expressly declared as the intent of Collier Township
that this Ordinance has been adopted as if such unconstitutional or illegal provision or provisions
had not been included herein.
Section 5: Pending Legislation
In the event of the passage of legislation governing DROPs in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, this Ordinance shall be amended to comply with any new legal requirements set
fotth in such legislation. The application of any amendments to police officers actively employed
as of the effective date of any such legislation shall be governed by and consistent with
constitutional principles applicable to the pension and retirement benefits.

I

{Do~No~0Q4!5468.I }

26

Exhibit "D"
"Weapons Purchi!se Program"

1. Collier Township Police Officers will submit their order for one weapon (Duty, Back-Up,
Off-Duty, Rifle or Shotgun) that they are purchasing. Collier Township will pay the bill and
deduct the cost of the weapon from the Officer's pay over the course of eighteen (18) months
or thirty-nine (39) pay periods. The Officer will also have the ability to pay off the balance at
any time during the 18 month deduction period. The payroll clerk would handle all of the
necessary payroll deductions.

I

I

2. Officers will not be permitted to purchase any weapon that they are unable to pay back
within the 18 month timeframe. Also, any officer who leaves the employment of the
Tovmship will have the entire outstanding balance owed on the weapon deducted from
their last paycheck, or will be required to remit the entire outstanding balance to the
Township. In the event the entire balance is not paid, the weapon will become the
property of Collier Township and any transfer paperwork costs will be the responsibility
of the officer.
3. An officer will be required to qualify with the weapon within twelve (12)months of
receiving the weapon from the seller. Failure to qualify with the weapon will result in a
default on the program and the officer will become responsible for the remaining
payments in one lump payment. The payment can be deducted from the officers paycheck
if he or she elects to do so.

I

(DocNo=00415468.1 }

27

ExhibitE
•(~unlclpal Benefits
Services

MBSPPO500-RxOption1
EffectiveDate:January1,2019to December311 20Hl
On the chmtbefow,you'llseewhat your plflnpf!ysfor .speclfk.se1vkes.You nmybe responsiblefor fl fhdHtyfee, clinicdiarge or similarfee orcho.rge
(i11.
addition10a11y1irofe.<;cional
fee~)ifyom office visHor aer,ice is prodded nt a locati\1ntlrnt([Ualifiesas r1 hosvital department or a .\.l1tellite
buildingQf
a hos Jital
.,---··

Out-of-Network

Network

Benefit

...

General ProYisiohs

.

CalendarYear

Benefit Period('1)
Deductible (per benefit period)

$500
$1,000
100%after deductible

EmployeeOnly Plan
Farn\ly Plan

Plan Pavs - oa11mentbasedon the ..,Ianallowance

I

$1,000
$2,000
80% after deductible

Out-of-Pocket Limit (Once met, plan pays 100%

coinsurance for the rest of the benefit period)
Employee Only Plan
Familv Plan
Medical Total Maximum Out-of-Pocket (Includes
deductible, coinsurance, copays and other qualified medical
expenses, Netwo,rk.only)G2)Once met, the plan pays 100% of
covered servlces for the rest of the benefit period,
Employee Only Plan
Familv Plan
.

.

'

..

.

Retail Clinic Visits & Virtual Visits
Primarv Care Provider Office Visits & Virtual V!sits
_SpecialistOffjQ~
...
~..
Y.J!:!.Y.~LYJ~J.~.~
··-·····
·
Virtual Visit Orialnatlna Site Fee
Uraent Care Center Visits
Telemedic1ne Sarvice(3)
.
.

$3,000
$6,000

None
None

$3,425
$6,850

c·- ._'.,·
Offic8/Cllllii::/Ur'a.Eint
careVJSiis
100% after $20 copavment
100% after $20 copavment
1..9.Q%after $20 copay_l})_l;;!_f"ll
----

100% after deduct!ble
100% after $20 col'lavment
100% after $10 copayment
.
PreV,IJ!ntiveCaniMl

Not Appl1cable
Not Applicable

•.

........
·.

.

·

.....··•·

.

..

80% after deductible
80% after deductible
80% after deduct!ble
0/o after deductible
80% after deductible
Not Covered

.··ao

;

~

I
Routine Adult
Not Covered
___
........
1.Q9.~~
..
J9_(:!;~ctible
does
n~t
_aPE:11;(---··
.
Physfc:;al
exams
. ······----.. ·------··-······
-···
.§0°/o
·afterdeductible
i qgJ_~_
(deduotlble does not ape)y
Adult Immunizations
·80% (deductible does not apptfl __
100% (deductible does net al'll'llv\
Routine ~~Q_glcaTexams, inoludinn a Pan Test
80% after deductible
100% (deductible does not al'll'llv)
MammN1rams,annual routine and medlcallv necessar,r
8Mi> after deductible
100% (deductible does not aMlv\
Q1aqnostlcservices and rirocedures
Routine Pediatric
Not Covered
100% /deductible does not aonlv)
Phvsical exams
80'.I/Ei
/deductible does not anQ)_y}
__
100% /deductible does not aoolv)
Pediatric·Immunizations
80°/oafter deductlble
100% (dedu<.tibtedoes not apolv)
Olaonostlc services and orocedures
-.- ,_' ; -,-.;-:
Hosnttal and·Medici:11/SuraicalEX t'i'Se\,lirii::IUdii:ici-rrlatetnilii\ "',: · .. :
80% after deductible
100% after deductible
Hospital Inpatient
'
80% after deductible
100% after deductible:
Hospital Outpatient
100% after deductible
Maternity {non~preventlvefacility & professlonal services)
BO''/.:,
after deductible
.JJl:91~9.i.D.Q..Qependent
daugt)ter
100% after deductible
Medical Care {including Inpatient vlslls and
80% after deductible
consuftations)/Suraical Ex"""nses
··.
.·
..
.·
EnierClencv'SeNices - , _,, c- _- -·
.
..
100% after $75 copayment (>Naivedif admitted)
Emergency Room Services
!deductible does not anr'llvl
100% after Network deductible
Ambulance• Emeraencv
100% after Network deduotlble
Ambulance Non~Emeraencv
.
.
_-,.,·,- . ,::-,,.
.
Theranv and Rehabllitati_on Ser,v_ices(9) -· ,--,,,":
I
80%i after deductible
I
100% after $20 copayment
Physical Medicine
Llmlt: 20 visits/benefit perlod
80% af:e; deductible
100% after $20 cooavment
Occupational Therapy
Llmit: 20 visits/benefit neriod
801% after deductible
100% after $20 copavment
Speech Therapy
Um)t: 20 visits/benefit neriod
100% after Network deduc\lble
Resoiratorv Therapv
80% after deductible
Spinal Manipulations
_..l.9.Qo/.:~
--~-~~!
..~.?..9
..9.9.~Y~:e.:.nt I
Limit 20 vlsits/beneffr'~'eriod
!
Other Therapy Services (Cardiac Rehab, Infusion Therapy,
80% after deduct:ble
100% after deductible
I
Chemotherapv, Radiation Thera-" and Dlah1slsl
"""""""""""'"'"""

""'"""'"

I

{DocNo~004 l 5468.l l

28

.....

'

lnl"I.Jtient
lnt:i;:itientD-etox!flcationfRehabiUtatlon
Outpatient
IncludesVirtualBehavloralHealthvtstts
outp.:.tlent Substance Abuse-

MentolHeolth/Substonce
Abuse
100%atter deduclillle

80% after deductible
80% after deductible

100% afterdeduc-!il)le
100% after$20 copayment

80% after de.ctuclib!e

·100%after$20 copayment
..
OtherServices
100% aner deductible
'100%,afferdeduc\il)le

Allerav Extracts and lnlectlons
Ap_plled Behavior Analys!s for Autism Spectrum

Dlsordem:,
Assisted Fertmzatlo-nPrCH:edures
De.ntafServices Related to Accidental lniurv
Diilgnostlc Servlces
Advanced/manln"'MRI, CAT, PET scan, etcJ
BasicDlagnosucSetV/ces{standardImaging, diagnostic
medical,fab!,.,,,.,thol""''.
aller=• test!nnl
Durable Medie-a!Eauloment, Orthotic:s and Prosthetics
Home Health care
Home-JnfUsionThera"'''
Hosoice
lnfertilitv Counselinn, Testlnt1.andTreatment101

I

Out-of-Network:

Network

Benefit

80°/oti!l;erdeductible
80% .afterdedUC.tlble
80% after deductible

Nol Covered

.

Prlvate Outv Nurslno

SkilledNursingFacilityOare
Transolant Servioes
Precertlfle.'.lt!onReriuirements(7)

·mo%after deductible

80% after deduct!ble

100%afier deducllble

80%,after deducUble

80%,after deductible
100%after deductible
80% aner deductible
100%after deductible
80% after deductible
100%atterdeductlble
100% atter Networ1<
deouctible
BO%aner deductible
'l-01)%
after deductible
80% aner d.educllble
I00%after deductible
100% alter Networ1<
deductible
SO%aner deouctlble
100%after deductible
Limit 100 dayslbenefltpertod
.80%afterdeductible.
100%after deductible
Yes
._~ '

.·•·

Pr.. crlollonDruas
Proscription Drug Deductjble
lndiVldual
Family
Prescription Drug Total Moximum Out-ot-Pock•t {Includes
dectucllb-le,
cotnsuranc:e,
copays-and other qu@Imect
presc,ipfiondrug expenses,Networ1<
only) (2JOnce met the
plan pays 100% of covered s-ervtcesfor the rest of the benefit
period.
EmployeeOnly Plan
FamllvPlan
Prescription Qrug Program{Ol
son MandatoryGeneric
Oetfnedbi f/JeNationalPlus PharmacyNetwotlif~ Not
Pl,ysicmn,Network.
Prescriptionsartedal a non-network

I

None
None

~

.

.

.

.

Nol applicable
Not Applicable

$3,425

Not Apptfcable
Not ,~~licable
RHallDrugs (31160/9(1,day
Supply)
$8/St61$24generic¢op..11111ent
$30!$60/$90fumrul,rybrandcopny=nt
$55)$110/$!!55noo.forumlarycopayment

$6)l50

plwm.1a.cy-are
notcovered,
Yourplanuses.thecomprehensive
Fonnutarywithan
IncentiveBenefitDesign

MaintenanceDrugs through 1\ItdIOl'de-i·(9-0-day
Suppl)'}
$16 generic.copay1uent
$60 formutaryru:andco.payment
S 110non-fonrrolarvbrandc--;:iyment

Thisis not a contract,ThtSbenefitsStJJmna!Ypresentsplan hlghlfgntsortly. P!ea:se
refer to the poli:eyJ pfan.documents,as Umilatlonsandexc!usfons
app~/. TM poH-cy
I plan documentscontra! in the e•;:;ent
of a .confl!ctwith lhls OOnem
summary,
1) Youf group',sbenemparlodrS base<!on a CalenctnrYearwhfch
run.sfromJanuary1 to December31.
(2) Toa NetworkTotal MaximumOut--of•Potket{TMOOPJls manda!OO
by the federnlg-ovsmnient,TMOO.PmustlncfudedeductHYle,
coinsurance,copays,
prnscriptlcndrug cos! share and any quaijfled medical expi::lMB.
(3) ServlcMare providedf-01'a.c11te
caretorminor illnesses-.Servicesmust be pe-rtomied
PYan approvedtelemedic.ina.
provider. VtrhmlSeh;ivk:ralhe.aith
vlslts providedby an approvedte.le-medlclne
provB:1vr
.are-ellgl!Jleundertti-eOutpal!entM-en1aJ.
Hea!thl$ubstmceAbuse ben.efit
(4) scervletlsare limitedto.thoselisted on tfle PreventiveSc:hedule,(Women's-HealthPreventiveSchedulemay apply.)
(5) Coverngekif .e!i_g1bilc+
members to age-21..After ln\!lQl:ana1J'S-i$,
se:rvlooswlll be paid accordingto U1ebenefll categ-ory{e ,g.speech lheraw). Treatment for
autismspectrumdisorders®e-s.not reducevlsWdayllmH;s;,
te) TreatmentIncludescove-mgefor the correctJonof a physle.alor me-dfetltproblemaSS'Odatedwith lrifertJWty.lnfertl!ttyri!UQtherapy may or may not be
cove:sad
cteptmdin_9
on your group'sprescriptiondrugprogram.
\f) Medica! Managemsr1t
& Policy{MM&P)m~istbe oontoctOO
prior to a plannedlnp.1t~n\a-dmlsslon
or wf!Mn48 tiourscf an eme-rgencyor molemtty-rela\ed
Inpatientadm!sslon.Be sureto verifytnat your provtderIBcontactingMM&Pfor prei::,ertrtlcatkm.
lf thts Coosnot occurand lt Is latETdetermlnedthat all or
partot the inpatientstay waGnm medtCci!tynecessar;1or approprla1e-,
you wte00:responsiblefor-_payrnem
:of_
any.costsnot.covered.
(BJ Theronm1to.ry
ls an extensiv!:Hsior FO\.xland DrugAdministmtlon{FDA)approvedpresctlpll.ondrugs-selectedfor tneir quality,'S(lfe-ty
ar:deffe-ctr.·enass.
Therormularywas developedby PharmacySeNlce3and apprm'Bdby the Pharmacyand TherapeutlcsCO!'nmfttee
made:up ol cnnlc,.11
pham1a:d:sts
and
_pJv{Slcians.
All planrormulnrlesIncludeproducts:in &VfJfY
majortherapeutfcca!agoty, Flan fomrnlmies,vary by the.numbarof differentdru.gstheycover
andin the cost-$hmingrequir&ments. Your programlnclui:!-es
coveragefor-!Jo1h
formuiary.andnon-lounutary
drug,eal the-copayment.or
MlnsumnC-J:J:
amountstitted aoove. UnderUresoJI.mantlatorygenericprovfslon,whenyou-pvrehas.e
a brnnd-drug-Umt
h.asa genMc.equl\'Jlent,you wlflbe respC:11$lble
fo-rme !)mild drugcop-aym.ent
plus the dfffere11CB
1ncoot beiWeen"tt'lebrand randgenericdrugs,unless your doctorrequeststhat iile tmmd drug00
di:spensed,
WI1fyou'reenroll~ underHighmnrk,PT/OThave 20 visits per,-epaJake-thempy.
lf yi:.11/ra
enrofledim:di;rUPMCHe.althPlan,PT!OThave a wmblned 4-0visits.
MBS PPO 500-RxOptkin '! - (NGF) Effective 1l1!'19~J2!3ff19

{DocNo~004I5463.l )

29

I

I

I.
I

I'

I .

I

I
I

{DocNo~00415468.1l

30

Attachments
L Memorandum Dated 3-27-06 regarding DROP Pension Benefits

I
I

I
I

I
I

I
I

(DocNo~004 I 5468. l )

31

MEMORA!'{DUM

I
1 ·

I:

TO:'

JEANNECREASE

FROM:

W. TitvlOTHYBARRY,ESQUIRE

DATE:

N!ARCH27, .2006

lNRE:

DROPPENSIONBENEFITS

frttli-!tl,,,-it·~i:il.'if'Wt.'**il~4fit·¼♦'Sfritt-:k*1f::tt*il','i;4'/Y-:fUhl.'i!fl•'tni'Wit'i;ff;@:kitif'Yf1fi!J_ft'-•·.\ltli'ii'~'/t;

Thefollowingls my ,espouseto OfficerLamb'smemodatedMarch.;),'.W06
concerningthe abovematter. Coneemlngthe paymentfor acc\llllulattd.sickdays, I !'eCommend
'I . tliat, wbenenteringthe DROP program,an officerwouldbe paidforilp to $4
I ffllCll.!llUlatcdlunuscd
sick days (at 50%), Upon separationfromthe &ipattmentat the endof the
DROPprogram,the officer ~d
be paid for up to 96.ll!lC\.lmUlated/unused.siclc
da.ys,slnccthe
total !)mountof daysthat.~y be accum\llaudfa150, In this~hion. the officercowdbavethe ·
54 days includ<ld
in the ~¢culationofhis pension,but would$!illhavemy remaining
'
aceumulated
sick da:($avaitablcduring¢heDROPpert.od,
µp to a maximwn•of96day,.
Secondly,the DROPprogram1s~iearthatlt onlyappliesto JJOrmal
retirement$(age55 and.25
ytm -i:uservice),lt docsitnt apply to !Ill Act 24 refuement(act\lUially
~ducedpensiouafter~O
yeani of service}.
:

I'

I
I

Pleasefoe! freeto CC!llt=;\me If Y(luhaveanyquestionseoncerningthe above.

I
I
WfBi1hp

f DocNo-'004 l 5468. l )

32

OF

fth(l,ia.✓•f

LEGALLY BOUND THEREBY:

4

EXECUTED THIS rDAY

WITNESS

, 201__1____,
AND INTENDING TO BE

COLLIER To,vNSHIP POLICE ,v AGE
AND POLICY COMMITTEE

COLLIER TOWNSHIP

I

I

{DocNo"'004I 5468.I

J

33

