BOROUGH OF EDGEWORTH

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT

January 1, 2020
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE
ARTICLE

I

0

Til

IV

Vv

VI
VII
VI
IX

x

Xl
XII
XIII
XIV
XV
XVI
XVI
XVIII
XIX
XxX
XXI
XXII
XXIII
XXIV
XXV
XXVI
XXVI
XXVIII
XXIX
XXX
XXXI

INDEX

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING... cccccceccccenececesrsenscesenenescsseesseneeeceeeseenas I
WORK DAY, WEEK AND SCHEDULE... ccc cc ceeeee see seeeneesesesaneenes 2
EFFECTIVE DATE 1... ccecceccceceseeesccereeseeseseascsasaseenssessseeesessecesssenssensscneseress 2
BASE SALARY, HOURLY RATE, OVERTIME RATE voicccsseesseeeeees 3
LONGEVITY PAY wooo. ceccccerssececcesceseccessesesenesesasseseneaaseesasenseaeseesaseaseecaeseneneees 4
OFF DUTY COURT AND CRIME LAB APPEARANCES 1.0... eeeeeees 4
VACATIONS wiicecceescscsenecsessccsseseseeeesesesscsnseasecesecsesesstsseessesessressenernesseseseeeed 5
HOLIDAYS HOLIDAY PAY AND COMP TIME... ee eeccsescessteneenees 6
LIFE INSURANCE oo cieeseecnceenereeerecnereresneersrsesssessssessesssssesssenesessessaaes 7
MEDICAL VISION AND DENTAL INSURANCE... cece ereeeeeeeiren 7
POLICE PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY INSURANCE ..... cece 9
SICK LEAVE ou... eceescesecnseeessssseecessenessesseesevaseeeecssessenesenssssesesserasiseneenvensenaa 9
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE... cccccecsessesseeeeeescnscsesneesersensenssnesiesneenensenes 1
PERSONAL LEAVE Wu... eececccecescsesereesesecsecesenecnscnesenessesiesnesnecsacseceenenseses 11
PENSION VESTING SCHEDULE uu... eects esteenseereneneseeeeneensetaee 12
CLOTHING ALLOWANCE 1... ceeecceee ces eaneneeseneesessseensessesseesessensniess 12
PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION 000. ceneeeeeeescerennessesseresetensererseeneenes 12
PENSION ARRANGEMENTS ... ce cceccsescseteeessesecesesseseeesssesseenserespernseres 13
MANDATORY PHYSICAL wo. eecescescereeeeescrecsersscseersreaterteserernersaeses 14
RECEIPTED EXPENSES 00... ce ccccecnsecsseecsenesecnsesesssesscseesersanestsseteseeeneenes 14
SAFETY POLICY ooo. cesceeescecenecreneseeeseeseaseenserespeeneseereeetesessseenaenensees 14
PHYSICIANS PANEL oo. cceccetcsereeeeeseesceseseeseeresespeeessnsecesnecnesnesneenennes 15
SEPARATE CONTRACT FOR CHIEF... ccscccccccneeneecerenenesseeeenreseee 15
GRIEVANCE PROCEEDINGS ou. ccc ccceceneene ces cne reece tseneenstsenesresnsenes 15
PROBATIONARY PERIOD/NEW HIRES ooo. ee cece serene etrrneesees 17
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS oo cc cesecencescneenensereseoreneneserecesnseneeaseeeneenes 17
CHANGES IN AGREEMENT 0c ceececceseneeneeesceseneesscnseseeneensenseseeeseaes 18
WORK STOPPAGE 0.00. ciccceeecccecenesereeescenesnesecenseseseecseesssneesenscneeneeaeens 18
SEVERABILITY ooo ccc cseseeeescerersenecescnsenscneeeensserescnsessanesnecneeiaeeeeae 19
RESIDENCY occ ccsescsecsccneesenensscneesecssceecnereecescsesseeeseesessneeesecneesaeneets 19
ENTIRE AGREEMENT |... eeeeececceseneeeeeseeeneeesecsseesesseseesseneseseseuensnensas 20
AGREEMENT

THIS AGREEMENT, effective the Ist day of January 2020 by and between:

BOROUGH OF EDGEWORTH, a municipal corporation organized and
existing under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and located
in the County of Allegheny and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania aforesaid
(hereinafter referred to as "Borough”),

AND

WAGE AND POLICY REPRESENTATIVES of the Police Force of the
Borough (hereinafter referred to as "Representatives").

WITNESSETH

WHEREAS, the Borough and the Representatives have settled their differences through a
collective bargaining process; and

WHEREAS, the Borough and the Representatives agree that they are bound by the terms
of the Act of June 24, 1968, P.L. 237, No. 111, 43 P.S. § 217.1 et seq., ("Act 111" hereinafter).

NOW, THEREFORE, for and in consideration of the covenants herein contained and
intending to be legally bound hereby, the parties hereto do hereby covenant and agree as follows:

ARTICLE 1
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING

By execution of this Agreement, the Representatives certify that they have been
designated by fifty-one (51%) percent or more of the members of the Police Force of the
Borough as the exclusive collective bargaining agents for the Police Force of the Borough with
respect to the terms and conditions of their employment including compensation, hours, working
conditions, retirement, pensions and other benefits. Evidence of such designation will be

produced by the Representatives, upon request by the Borough.
ARTICLE IT
WORK DAY, WEEK AND SCHEDULE

A "work day” shall consist of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours beginning with the
scheduled starting time of the first shift of 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m., then the second shift of 3:00
p-m. to 11:00 p.m., and then the third shift of 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. A "scheduled work day”
shall consist of eight (8) consecutive hours of work per shift. However, in no event shall a
member of the Police Force be required to work more than seven (7) consecutive scheduled work
days under a work schedule, except in the event of an emergency or temporary vacancy on the
police force arising out of illness or other reason. Each member of the Police Force shall, subject
to the third sentence of this Paragraph 2, work the shifts and work days assigned to him by the
Borough, and the Borough reserves the right to change and adjust the shift starting times in the
event of an emergency, in the event that it deems it necessary or determines that special
operational needs require it. Overtime may be accumulated within the applicable calendar year,
but is not cumulative from year to year or carried over to any subsequent year. If overtime is

required, an officer is guaranteed at least three (3) hours of such overtime, excluding holdovers.

ARTICLE Hi
EFFECTIVE DATE

This Agreement shall become effective as of January 1, 2020 and shall continue in full

force and effect through December 31, 2023.
ARTICLE IV
BASE SALARY, HOURLY RATE, OVERTIME RATE

Except as set forth in Article XXVI with respect to the newly hired full-time officers, the

Base Salary for each full-time member of the Police Force will be as follows:

 

Period: Hourly Rate: Annual Base Salary:
January |, 2020 through December 31, 2020 $42.85 $89,128

January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2021 $44.14 $91,811.20

January 1, 2022 through December 31, 2022 $45.47 $94,577.60

January 1, 2023 through December 31, 2023 $46.84 $97,427.20

The Borough agrees that if a member of the Police Force is appointed to the position of
Sergeant pursuant to the terms outlined in Article XX VI, the hourly rate shall increase by one
dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per hour over the base hourly rate outlined above.

‘The Borough agrees to pay Overtime to a member of the Police Force at the rate of one
hundred fifty (150%) percent of the member's Regular Hourly Rate (a) for any time worked over
eight (8) hours per day; (b) for any time called out to work on a scheduled day off; and, (c) for
any shift, excluding holdovers, where the member has not had a least sixteen (16) hours of time
off before the commencement of such shift.

If the CPI-U of the previous year is five percent (5%) or greater, the Borough agrees to
renegotiate the Base Salary set forth in this Article |V for the year following such 5% year, if
requested in writing by the Representatives by May 31 of the year following the 5% year. If no
agreement is reached by June 30 of the year in which the request is properly made, either party
may request arbitration. Any increase will be retroactive to January 1 of the year under

negotiation.
ARTICLE V
LONGEVITY PAY

Each policeman entitled to longevity pay shall be paid at the rate of Five ($5.00) Dollars
per month, if such policeman has between one (1) and three (3) years of service. Each policeman
entitled to longevity pay shall be paid at the rate of Six ($6.00) Dollars per month, if such
policeman has between (4) and ten (10) years of service. Each policeman entitled to the
longevity pay shall be paid at the rate of Seven ($7.00) Dollars per month, if such policeman has
eleven (11) or more years of service. The total amount of longevity pay to be paid any officer
may not, however, exceed One Thousand Five Hundred ($1,500) Dollars if the Officer is hired
on or before December 31, 2015. The total amount of longevity pay to be paid any officer may
not, however, exceed One Thousand Two Hundred ($1,200) Dollars if the Officer is hired on or

after January 1, 2016.

ARTICLE VI
OFF DUTY COURT AND CRIME LAB APPEARANCES

If a member of the Police Force represents a municipality during his time off in a trial
court of record in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in a proceeding directly related to his
duties as such member or otherwise when authorized to do so by the Chief of the Police Force or
Borough Manager, he shall be entitled to reectve compensation cqual to cight (8) times his
Regular Hourly Rate per day of representation, or compensation for actual time spent, whichever
is greater. In appellate court proceedings or when delivering evidence to a criminal laboratory,
the member shall be paid at his regular hourly rate, but the minimum deemed appearance time for
an appellate court appearance and pre-trial appearance shall be four (4) hours, and the minimum

deemed appearance time for crime laboratory duties shall be three (3) hours.
Ifa member of the Police Force represents a municipality during his time off before a
Magistrate in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in a proceeding directly related to his duties as
such member, or otherwise when authorized to do so by the Chief of the Police Force or the
Borough Manager, he shall be entitled to receive reimbursement of Fifteen ($15) Dollars per
proceeding, or compensation for actual time spent, with a minimum compensation of two (2)

hours at 1.5 times the officer’s hourly rate, whichever is greater.

ARTICLE VII
VACATIONS

The Vacation Schedule during the term of this Agreement is as follows:

Service Work Days
1 year of continuous service but less than 5 years 10
5 years of continuous service but less than 12 years 15
12 years of continuous service but less than 17 years 20
Over 17 years of continuous years 25

The vacation year shall be the calendar year and for vacation purposes, the years of
continuous service of a member of the Police Force for any vacation year shall be those years of
continuous service which he has as of December 31 of such vacation year. In addition, if a
patrolman starts work any time during the year, he shall receive five (5) days vacation in the
current calendar year if hired between January 1 and June 30th to be taken between July 1 and
December 31 based on seniority. An officer hired on or after July 1 would not be eligible for any

vacation days until the next calendar year. The vacation period of each member of the Police
Force will be as agreed to by the Borough and such member. Members (i.e., full-time officers)
shall select their vacation periods in order of their seniority.

It is understood and agreed that the above schedule is based upon members of the Police
Force working no more than five (5) consecutive scheduled work days under a work schedule,
except in the event of an emergency or temporary vacancy on the police force arising out of
iliness or other reason. Should the work schedule change such that the Members are normally
working seven (7) consecutive scheduled work days, then the Vacation Schedule in the
Collective Bargaining Agreement between the parties hereto which was effective January 1, 1995
to December 31, 1998, will again become effective and the Vacation Schedule set forth herein
will be void. This section will not be construed as limiting, waiving or otherwise restricting the
right of the Borough to set and change work schedules, as set forth in Articles I] and XX VII
hereof.

ARTICLE VII

HOLIDAYS, HOLIDAY PAY AND COMPENSATORY TIME

The following Holidays are recognized as such by the Borough and the Representatives:

New Year's Day Labor Day
Good Friday Veterans Day
Easter Thanksgiving
Memorial Day Christmas
Independence Day New Year's Eve

Recognized holidays shall be twenty-four (24) consecutive hours beginning with the
starting time of the first shift of the recognized holiday. Holiday pay, as noted in the following,
shall be made to officers working within the twenty-four (24) hour period. Payment for officers
working a scheduled eight hour shift on a recognized holiday shall be double time and one-half

(i.e. base salary plus 1-1/2 times hourly rate). If an officer should work more than an eight (8)
hour shift on a recognized holiday, or, if an officer is called out to work on a recognized holiday
when the officer has not been scheduled to work that day, compensation to an officer for such
time worked shall be at the rate of 2-1/2 times his hourly rate. The Borough reserves the right to
first offer additional Over Time or Call Out holiday hours to a Part Time officer. An officer who
does not work on a recognized holiday shall receive double time pay (i.e., base pay plus eight (8)
times the officer’s Regular Hourly Rate).

Holiday pay shall be paid to each member of the Police Force during the month in which
the holiday falls. However, a member of the Police Force may, at his option and in lieu of
holiday pay, take compensatory time, provided that he first obtains permission of the Chief of the
Police Force to do so. There shall be no maximum limit for compensatory hours taken in lieu of
holiday pay. Compensatory time may be earned in lieu of overtime pay as well, but shall not
exceed forty (40) hours per year in lieu of overtime pay, and a part-time officer must be used to
provide coverage when this time is used. Compensatory time may be carried from month to

month and year to year.

ARTICLE Ix
LIFE INSURANCE

The Borough will provide each member of the Police Force with group term life

insurance in the amount of Fifty Thousand ($50,000) Dollars during the term of this Agreement.

ARTICLE X
MEDICAL, VISION AND DENTAL INSURANCE

During the term of this Agreement, the Borough will provide to members of the Police

Force group medical insurance coverage under the Municipal Benefits Services MBS PPO
2600Q Plan, with Integrated Drug Deductible. The Borough agrees to pay the deductible for the
plan. All members of the Police Force will be required to contribute towards the group medical

insurance coverage, via payroll deduction, as per the following schedule:

 

PERIOD: CONTRIBUTION PER BI-WEEKLY PAY PERIOD:
January 1, 2020 - December 31, 2020 Ninty dollars ($90.00)
January 1, 2021 - December 31, 2021 One Hundred dollars ($100.00)
January 1, 2022 - December 31, 2022 One Hundred Ten ($110.00)
January 1, 2023 - December 31, 2023 One [Jundred Fifteen ($115.00)

If the insurance rate for the Borough should increase more than thirty percent (30%) at the time
of policy renewal, the Borough reserves the right to open this contract for negotiations for
medical insurance coverage contributions only. If re-opened, the Police Force (Bargaining Unit)
reserves the right to binding arbitration on this item only.

The Borough will provide at no cost to the members of the bargaining unit, High Option
Dental coverage through United Concordia™ (MEIT) The Borough reserves the right to purchase
equivalent coverage from another insurance carrier. The Borough shall also provide at no cost to
the members of the bargaining unit, VBA Basic Vision Insurance through MEIT. The Borough
reserves the right to purchase equivalent coverage from another insurance carrier. A fully retired
member of the Police Force shall also be entitled to continue to participate in any such group
hospitalization insurance program, subject to the condition that such retired member shall
reimburse the Borough on a monthly basis for the premiums attributable to his continued
participation.

A member of the police force may completely opt out of the family and spousal coverage

option of the medical insurance plan with written spousal permission and Borough's insurance
carricr's permission and by showing proof of other medical insurance coverage. In lieu of
Borough family insurance coverage, One Hundred ($100) Dollars additional compensation will
be added to the officer's bi-weekly pay.

A member of the police force may opt out of individual medical insurance coverage by
showing proof of other medical insurance coverage and with permission of the Borough's
insurance carrier. In lieu of Borough insurance coverage for individual coverage, a fifty ($50)
Dollar additional compensation will be added to the officer's bi-weekly pay.

The opt-out program will be pursuant to a written policy established by the Borough that

will contain applicable IRS restrictions.

ARTICLE XI
POLICE PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY INSURANCE

All members of the Police Force will be covered by a Police Professional Liability
Insurance policy with an annual liability limit of Five Hundred Thousand ($500,000) per
occurrence and an annual aggregate liability limit of One Million ($1,000,000) Dollars. The cost
of such insurance shall be borne by the Borough. The Borough also agrees to use its best efforts
to purchase a similar policy with a combined single liability limit of One Million ($1,000,000)

Dollars.

ARTICLE XII
SICK LEAVE

Each member of the Police Force shall earn sick leave hours for non-job related illnesses
or disabilities at the rate of eight hours for each month of work. One thousand four hundred and
forty hours (180 days) may be accumulated. When a member of the Police Force is not able to

work on any scheduled work day due to a non-job related illness or disability, he will exhaust
eight hours of sick time. Until all the sick leave hours are exhausted, the sick member shall be
compensated at one hundred (100%) percent of his Regular Base Salary. After the sick leave
hours are exhausted, the member will be paid at the rate of fifty (50%) percent of his Regular
Base Salary until the date of his retirement, such payment to be reduced, however, by any
benefits (other than any benefits privately purchased by the member) paid by any governmental
agency, insurer or third party by reason of the member's disability or illness. A member of the
Police Force with less than six (6) months of service will receive no such compensation after the
exhaustion of his sick leave hours. A member has the right to re-accumulate sick leave hours
after all or part of them have been exhausted by earning the same at the rate of eight (8) hours for
each month subsequently worked after his disability or illness. The Borough reserves the right to
require a member of the Police Force on sick leave to be examined by a physician selected by the
Borough and the member. The Borough also shall have the right to require a Physician's
Certificate in order to verify any sick leave time taken by such member in excess of three (3)
consecutive days. In the event that such an examination results in a finding by the physician that
the member is not at work for a reason unconnected to a legitimate non-job related illness or
disability, no compensation shall bc paid to such member until he returns to work. A job-related
illness or disability will be only compensated as required by applicable statute. No compensation
will be paid for accumulated sick leave hours to a member leaving the Police Force prior to full
retirement. At the time of full retirement, unused sick days shal! be bought back by the Borough
at a rate of fifty percent (50%) of the officer’s current hourly ratc, with the total amount of buy

back no to exceed five thousand $5,000.00)

10
ARTICLE XIU
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

Up to five (5) days of bereavement leave with pay concurrent with a death in the
immediate family will be granted to a member of the Police Force in the event of the death of a
spouse, child, parent, sister or brother, Up to three (3) days of bereavement leave with pay
concurrent with a death in the non-immediate family will be granted to a member of the Police
Force in the event of the death of a father-in-law, mother-in-law, and grandparent. One (1) day of
bereavement leave will be granted to a member of the Police Force in the event of the death of an
uncle or aunt. A member of the Police Force on bereavement leave will be compensated at one
hundred percent (100%) Regular Base Salary during the leave. Bereavement leave will be paid
only on those days that a member of the Police Force has been scheduled for work. No

bereavement leave will exhaust any sick leave hours granted under Paragraph 12 hereof.

ARTICLE XIV
PERSONAL LEAVE

The Borough shall provide three (3) personal leave days per year with prior approval from
the Chief of Police. Pay for personal leave days is to be included in an officer's Base Salary, and
all requests for such days are to be made fourteen (14) days prior to when the personal leave day
is to be taken. An additional personal day will be awarded to an officer in the calendar year
following a year in which the maximum of one hundred eighty (180) sick days have been

accumulated and no sick days for that year have been used.
ARTICLE XV
PENSION VESTING SCHEDULE

A participant who has completed at least twelve (12) years of aggregate service and
whose employment with the employer shall terminate for any reason other than death or total and
permanent disability prior to attainment of normal retirement shall be entitled to elect to receive a
deferred vested benefit in lieu of a distribution of accumulated contributions under the Police
Pension Plan by filing with Borough Council, within ninety (90) days from the date the
participant ceases to be a full-time police officer, a written notice of his intention to vest. Upon
reaching the date which would have been his superannuation retirement date if he had continued
to be employed as a full-time police officer, he shall be paid the accrued benefit (as defined in the

Police Pension Plan) as of the date of termination.

ARTICLE XVI
CLOTHING ALLOWANCE

Each member of the Police Force is entitled to an annual clothing allowance in the
amount of Six Hundred ($600) Dollars. The Borough will also furnish each member with leather
goods and jackets in the event that the same are deemed by the Borough to be needed by the
member. Title to any such uniforms, goods and jackets shall be vested in the Borough. All
cleaning expenses for uniforms, goods and jackets shall be paid out of each member's clothing
allowance.

ARTICLE XVII

PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION

For required schooling by the Borough, each officer who is off-duty will be paid at the

rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times his hourly rate while attending the school. For

12
non-required schooling approved by the Chief of Police and the Borough Manager, each officer
will receive reimbursement for the actual cost of the schooling (i.e. tuition, seminar fees, etc.).
For both required and non-required schooling, an officer shall receive a mileage allowance of
forty eight and one-half (48.5) cents per mile, or that allowance received by other Borough
employees, or the maximum fixed mileage allowance permitted under Section 274 of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, whichever allowance is greater, when using his/her own automobile

pursuant to an authorization to do so by the Chief of Police or Borough Manager.

ARTICLE XVIII
PENSION ARRANGEMENTS

The Borough agrees to amend its Police Pension Plan to increase the pension length of
service increment to $100 per month for service in excess of 26 years of service; $200 per month
in excess of 27 years; $300 per month in excess of 28 years: $400 per month in excess of 29
years and $500 per month in excess of 30 years of service under Act 600, 53 P.S. 771(f). This
amendment shall be effective as of January 1, 2008.

Effective for officers retiring on or after January 1, 2004, the Borough agrees to amend its
Police Pension Plan to provide a cost-of-living benefit pursuant and subject to Act 600 (53 P.S.
771(g)) which will provide for a ten (10) percent maximum increase in pension adjustment,
which will also never be more than seventy-five (75) percent of the salary used to compute the

original pension amount.
ARTICLE XIX
MANDATORY PHYSICAL

In addition to any physical examinations required by ARTICLE XII hereof, the Borough
shall have the right to require each member of the Police Force to take an annual physical
examination to be administered by an appropriate physician selected by the Borough. The cost of

any such examination shall be borne by the Borough.

ARTICLE XX
RECEIPTED EXPENSES

The Borough will pay all receipted expenses, such as parking and meals, of up to fifteen
($15) Dollars for any class or school over four (4) hours. Additionally, the Borough will pay all
receipted parking expenses related to court appearances. Officers agree to make a good faith

effort to find a reasonably priced Jot.

ARTICLE XXI
SAFETY POLICY

The parties hereto acknowledge that the maintenance of safe equipment and the adoption
of practices and procedures promoting safety are paramount objectives in the management of the
Police Force. The Borough agrees, in furtherance of these objectives, to direct the Chief of
Police to appoint an officer to monitor equipment maintenance and serviceability. The Borough
further agrees, in maintaining such equipment, to solicit the recommendations of the appointed

officer in this regard and to consider carefully such recommendations.

14
ARTICLE XXII
PHYSICIANS PANEL

The parties agree to the formation of a panel of physicians to review all work related
injuries in accordance with the Workers' Compensation Reform Act. The panel will be
comprised of local physicians and will be subject to the approval of the Borough's insurance

carrier.

ARTICLE XXII
SEPARATE CONTRACT FOR CHIEF

Regardless of whether the Chief of the Police is included as a matter of law in the
bargaining unit referenced to in ARTICLE I hereof, the parties hereto agree that the Borough may
enter into separate employment provisions for the Chief, and this Agreement will not be

applicable to him except to the extent that Act 130 so requires.

ARTICLE XXIV
GRIEVANCE PROCEEDINGS

A "grievance" shall mean any difference or dispute between the Borough and any
policeman with respect to the meaning, interpretation, claim of breach, or violation of any of the
provisions of the agreements between the parties. The proper parties to any grievance shall be
the Borough and the collective bargaining representative of the policemen and/or individual
policeman. All grievances shall be resolved in the following manner: Notice in writing by the
complaining party, stating in detail the grievance, shall be served on the other party. Such notice
shall include a designation of the person, named by the complaining party, authorized to discuss

the grievance, if other than the grievant. Within ten (10) days of receiving such notice, the other

15
party shall name in writing a representative authorized to discuss the grievance. The two
appointed representatives shall immediately commence discussions for the purpose of resolving
the grievance. In the event that the two representatives are unable to resolve the grievance to the
satisfaction of all parties within fifteen (15) days of the appointment of the second representative
or within twenty-five (25) days of receipt of the notice of grievance, the grievance shall be
submitted to and resolved by binding arbitration in accordance with the rules of the American
Arbitration Association and the Arbitration provisions of the Pa. Judicial Code, as amended to
datc, which provisions have replaced the Arbitration Act of 1927. The parties agree to abide by
the arbitration award which shall be final, binding and not subject to review except as provided
for in the aforesaid Judicial Code. The arbitrator shall have no power to alter, amend, add to, or
subtract from any of the terms of the agreement between the parties but shall determine only
whether or not there has been a misinterpretation, misapplication, breach, or violation of any
agreement between the parties. ‘The costs of the arbitration proceeding shal! be equally divided
between the parties. Each party shall be solely responsible for paying their respective
representatives or attorney. In all instances, the parties, which include the Borough, the
collective bargaining representatives of the policemen and any individual policeman, shall make
a good faith attempt to resolve all grievances without going to arbitration. However, if it is found
that this grievance procedure has not been followed in good faith by any party hereto or that the
agreement is being repeatedly breached by any party hereto, the arbitrator shal! impose the full
costs of the arbitration proceeding upon the breaching party and/or the party not acting in good
faith and shall award such additional compensatory damages as he deems appropriate up to a

maximum of One Hundred ($100) Dollars for conduct constituting bad faith or for each breach,

16
such payment to compensate the aggrieved party for the time and effort involved in dealing with

the bad faith conduct or breach.

ARTICLE XXV
PROBATIONARY PERIOD/NEW HIRES

The Borough shall set a probationary period for new members of the Police Force and
may during this period dismiss any new officer during or at the close of any such probationary
period, as provided by law. Until changed by the Borough, this period shall be one (1) year. A
full-time patrolman hired by the Borough during the term of this Agreement will receive the

following Base Salary:

 

Period Percent of Base Rate from Article II
Hire date to end of 18th month 70%
19th month to end of 36th month 75%
37th month to end of 48th month 80%
49th month to end of 60th month 90%
After 60th Month 100%

Provided, however, that any patrolman receiving Base Salary pursuant to the above will
advance on the above salary scale after an applicable Period only if such patrolman achieves any
minimum level of training required to be completed during the applicable Period. The minimum
training levels and required time of completion will be established by the Borough after

consultation with the Representatives by the time of hire.

17
ARTICLE XXVI
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

All of the rights, powers, authorities or other functions of management of the Police
Force that the Borough had prior to the signing of this Agreement are retained by the Borough
including but not limited to (subject to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
applicable thereto) the right to maintain order, discipline and efficiency in the operation of the
Police Force and to direct its members in regard thereto; to hire, suspend, discharge, lay off,
assign, promote to a higher rank (at a higher rate of pay) and determine the qualifications of the
members thereof; to determine the starting and quitting time of the members of the Police Force
and the number of hours and the particular hours to be worked thereby, the size of the Police
Force and the performance standards for each member thereof, reasonable rules and regulations
applicable thereto; and to otherwise generally manage the Police Force; provided that the
exercise of any such rights, powers, authorities or other functions of management shall not
violate the clear and explicit terms and provisions of this Agreement. The Borough agrees to
keep the appointment of the position of Sergeant open for the length of this agreement. The
Borough requires a written recommendation from the Mayor and Chief of Police for any member
of the Police Force to be considered to be appointed to the position of Sergeant. All other rights
of management are also expressly reserved, even though not enumerated above, unless they

violate the clear and explicit terms and provisions of this Agreement.

18
ARTICLE XXVII
CHANGES IN AGREEMENT

No member of the Police Force will make any demand or request to modify or amend the
terms and provisions of this Agreement or any other terms and conditions of employment, during
the duration of this Agreement.

ARTICLE XXVIII

WORK STOPPAGE

No member of the Police Force will participate in, aid or instigate, directly or indirectly,

any strike, work stoppage or other interruption of work during the duration of this Agreement.

ARTICLE XXIX
SEVERABILITY

In the event any provision of this Agreement or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is found to be invalid or in conflict with any applicable law, that provision shall be
of no further force and effect, but the remainder of the Agreement shall remain in full force and
effect. The provisions of this Agreement are hereby declared to be severable. In the event a
provision of this Agreement is found to be invalid and therefore severed, the Borough and the
Representatives shall meet and discuss the issue in an attempt to arrive at an alternative provision

on the same subject matter which is not contrary to law.
ARTICLE XXX

RESIDENCY

Officers shall be entitled to reside outside the Borough so long as the location of their

residence is within a reasonable driving distance of the police station. Officers are permitted to

reside within following municipalities. In the event that a municipality is not listed then a

maxium15 mile air mile radius will be the utilized in lieu of the above list of municipalities.

Aleppo Township

Aliquippa

Ambridge

Avalon

Baden

Bell Acres

Bellevue

Ben Avon

Ben Avon Heights

Bradford Woods

Canonsburg

Center Township

City of Pittsburgh
-North Side
-West End
-Crafton Heights

Collier Township

Conway

Coraopolis

Crafton

Cranberry Township
Crescent Township
Edgeworth
Economy

Emsworth

Findlay ‘Township
Franklin Township
Franklin Park
Freedom

Glenfield

Haysville

Hopewell Township
Independence Township
Ingram

Kennedy Township
Kilbuck

Leet Township
Leetsdale

Marshall Township
McCandless

20

McKees Rocks
Monaca

Moon Township
Neville Island
Oakdale

Ohio Township
Osborne

Patterson Township
Pine Township
Raccoon Township
Robinson Township
Rochester

Ross Township ~
Sewickley
Sewickley Heights
Sewickley Hills
Scott

South Heights
Stowe Township
West View
ARTICLE XXXI
ENTIRE AGREEMENT

This Agreement is the entire agreement between the parties.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have set their hands and seals as of the day

and year first written above.

ATTEST: BOROUGH OF EDGEWORTH

CPAP By: Vaenz
é residerft of Council
By. Poe +11)

Mayor

 

WITNESS: WAGE AND POLICY
REPRESENTATIVES POLICE FORCE,
BOROUGH OF EDGEWORTH

0.) L | By: ; Ta
N20 aft me )

 

 

 

 

 
