AGREEMENT

BETWEEN
TOWNSHIP OF SHALER
AND

SHALER TOWNSHIP POLICE

DATED: JANUARY 1, 2018

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE I - DEFINITIONS ooo seneeescenseesseneenesesnerecnenecaseessanessenensesevaeseneensssseseensensaeresnennenses l
ARTICLE II - TERM OF AGREEMENT |e ceeessetecsenseeseenscnetseseeeeneverseeesesecesenteasersneseeneneates 2
ARTICLE TTE- BASE ANNUAL WAGE 4. icccccscerserereneteerertenbeeenenecseneesenesreseetenernenseesineaeneraens 2
ARTICLE FV - LONGEVITY PAY vc sccccsccessecseeeeeecssseeseeseesecreneseesseescceesseesitessnsettastessetseeeeeed
ARTICLE V - ADVANCED TRAINING PAY ooo ie cccceeeneesseeseerecseneseetecseceneenserenseeseenereeaeerenees 4
ARTICLE VI - OFF-DUTY COURT TIME AND MAGISTRATES' HEARINGS ..... cece 4
ARTICLE VII - HOURS OF WORK, OVERTIME SHIFT ASSIGNMENTS

AND OTHER WORKING CONDITIONS 2. ceeseeseneeseeereceesenesaetrenetersenens 5
ARTICLE VITT- UNIFORM ALLOWANCE AND EQUIPMENT ......cescssccssssssscrsrsessenecerscersenes 8
ARTICLE [IX - OFF-DUTY EMPLOYMENT... ccccccscssscreersscrsescetscetsesereeeseaeneasessapeenansssseneas 10
ARTICLE X - SICK LEAVE we ceesereeeneeees seceeeeesseneesceesesseeenseseeneseeesneseensenegssssseneeeseeensenigs 10
ARTICLE XI ~ HOLIDAYS Lo iiccsesessscsncreeensnacnecensenseessevaeseeecaussersesieancasseeasarseeasereneeaseneneneas 12
ARTICLE XII - VACATIONS wc ccssecseetscnsrecssersensentearsetenseessensssenseecssvessanessagseseaseesteraeas 13
ARTICLE XHI - BEREAVEMENT LEAVE... ccccsssssessscessatersssercessenssersenseesesseasearesntasacaesores \4
ARTICLE XIV - JURY DUTY oi eccsesescrsseceereesetssseraneeseenesaesesaesseneserassenreeseesseeeaseneecetseseenesseas 15
ARTICLE XV - MEDICAL AND HEALTH INSURANCE... ccccscsseetsessercecsessesssereetsetenserens 15
ARTICLE XVI - LIFE INSURANCE oc ceccccssesercsteecersesscnecessensensrensenesecaenseesesateestesieneneeteas 19
ARTICLE XVII - FALSE ARREST INSURANCE oc ecccessesescsesterssceeaesassestscunsaesscesscsessenaseres 20
ARTICLE XVHI- ERRORS AND OMMISSIONS AND OTHER INSURANCE ... eee 20
ARTICLE XIX - SOCIAL SECURITY RE-OPENER 0... .cecccceesssesteeneneeeeeessseenaetecsescaseeenaseseres 20
ARTICLE XX ~ SCHOOLING oc cccceecessesseetsessesesscaeeenansserevsrasiecesssevsesessenseessesseseetsseessessasers 21

{DocNo=Q0586018.2 |
ARTICLE XXI - PENSION woes Veesedscnevenveusnescuseretensereusssuesssssessassossteatiasessavessareassesrssateas 21

ARTICLE XXII - DISABILITY BENEFITS... cccescsceteeresscnecteresersseseesntsersstenerierseernerareeees 24
ARTICLE XXIH - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE. ascetecstsnerescesrestestenssssseesessenserssceresteseess 26
ARTICLE XXIV - POSSIBLE MERGER WITH OTHER DEPARTMENTS uo. ccc sescsseeeeeees 29
ARTICLE XXV - UNENFORCEABILITY CLAUSE 0c cece ssccneneeerearceereereesneasseersenseneens 29
ARTICLE XXVI - PROBATIONARY POLICE OFFICERS ov cscssssssssersssserveersessssrscesesteeneas 29
ARTICLE XXVII - RESIDUAL RIGHTS wu. ccneeeeereerenseaseesersenseeseecsescevsseesenseassevseseteeeas 30
ARTICLE XXVIII - CIVIL SERVICE oc cccccesseecssersensessseserceseesseresseseessestsesseaseeseesesssesaeereases 30
ARTICLE XXIX - RESIDENCY wissccesssensssse eessestensceneneaneanesstetenesststetersetereseenesasnereseerenseneentas 30
SIGNATURES woes cereneescrerersneeseseenssrcevsensessesssenessenseureecaseesiestesesasassenstvesasdvertertenteeeacens 3]

{DocNo=G0586018.2 3
AGREEMENT

THIS AGREEMENT, entered into this Ist day of January 2018, by and between the
TOWNSHIP OF SHALER ("Township" hereinafter) and the SHALER POLICE EMPLOYEES

("Police" hereinafter) excluding Lieutenants, Captains, Deputy Chief and the Chief of Police:

WITNESSETH

WHEREAS, the Township and the Police have bargained collectively in accordance with
the terms of the Act of June 24, 1968, P.L. 237, No. 111, 43 P.S. & 217.1, et. seq., ("Act 111"
hereinafter); and have arrived at a settlement of their differences.

NOW, THEREFORE, for and in consideration of the mutual covenants contained herein,
and intending to be legally bound hereby, the parties hereto do covenant and agree as follows:

ARTICLE I
DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this Agreement, the following terms shall have the following meanings
unless otherwise indicated:

1. "Court Time" shall mean and be deemed to include job related appearances for
criminal court, juvenile court, federal court, coroner's inquests, commitment hearings under mental
health statutes, pre-trial conferences when attendance is requested by the District Attorney's office,
and any other job related appearances other than magistrates’ hearings or civil trials involving
claims for damages between private litigants.

2. "Police Officer” means any person employed by the Shaler Township Police

Department as a regular full-time Police Officer through the procedures established in conformity

{DocNo=00586018.2 } 1
with the Police Civil Service Act, excluding only the lieutenants, Captain, Deputy Chief and the

Chief of Police.
3. "Township" means the Township of Shaler.
4. "Years of Continuous Service" shall mean those years from the date a Police Officer

is hired until his/her employment is terminated by resignation, retirement, or by forced termination
by the Township. Years of continuous service shall not be interrupted by holidays, vacations, sick
leave, disability, leave of absence, or military leave.
ARTICLE II
TERM OF AGREEMENT
This agreement shall become effective January 1, 2018 and shall continue in effect through

December 31, 2022,

ARTICLE III
BASE ANNUAL WAGE
lL, Effective January 1, 2018, the base annual wage of each Police Officer shall be

increased as follows and the new wages reflected below:

 

TITLE January 1, 2018 January 1, 2019 January 1, 2020 January 1, 2021 Jammary 1, 2022

 

 

6! Year
“ $84,198.00 $86,302.95 $88,460.52 $90,672.03 $92,938.83
5 Year
— $76,620.18 | $78,535.68 | $80,499.07 _ |: $82,511.55 $84,574.34
Year
oe $70,726.32 $72,494.48 $74,306.84 $76,164.51 $78,068.62
3° Year
ONse' | $64,832.46 | $66,453.27_| $68,114.60 _| $69,817.46 | $71,562.90
2° Year
Officer | $58,938.60 $60,412.07 $61,922.36 $63,470.42 $65,057.18

I Year

Oflicer | $53,044.74 $54,370.86 $55,730.13 $57,123.38 $58,551.46

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

[DocNo=VOS86018.2

te
2. Sergeants shall receive a rank differential of $7,000.00 more than a Top Police
Officer’s base annual compensation. Detectives shall receive a rank differential of $3,500.00 more
than a Top Police Officer’s base annual compensation. The five steps for a new Police Officer
leading to a 6" year officer’s base compensation reflect the following ascending percentages from
a Top Police Officer’s rate: 63%, 70%, 77%, 84%, and 91%

3. A Police Officer moving through the steps towards being categorized as a 6" year
Police Officer shall move, on his/her anniversary date, one step annually.

4, In return for the above pay differential, when a sergeant or detective is in charge of
a shift, he/she shall not receive pay at a lieutenant's rate of pay. A Police Officer, when in charge

of a shift, shall receive pay at a sergeant's rate of pay.

 

ARTICLE IV
LONGEVITY PAY
I. Each Police Officer hired before January 1, 2019 shall receive Longevity Pay in
accordance with the following schedule:

YEARS OF SERVICE MONTHLY SALARY INCREMENT

After 6 years of service $ 95.00

Afier 10 years of service $105.00

Afier 15 years of service $120.00

After 20 years of service $130.00

2. Each Police Officer hired on or after January 1, 2019 shall receive Longevity Pay

in accordance with the following schedule:

 

YEARS OF SERVICE MONTHLY SALARY INCREMENT
After 6 years of service $ 75.00
After 10 years of service $100.00
After 15 years of service $115.00
After 20 years of service $130.00

{DocNoni0586018.2 | 3
ARTICLE V
ADVANCED TRAINING PAY
l, Advanced training pay shall be paid annually in accordance with the following
schedule in the first paycheck in December to each Police Officer who has obtained the following
police-related degrees on or before the first day of December. Any Police Officer who has more
than one (1) police-related degree shall receive advanced training pay only for the highest police-

related degree as follows:

Advanced Degree Advanced Training Pay
’ Associates Degree $200.00
Bachelor's Degree $300.00
Master's Degree $400.00
2. For employees hired after September 11, 2006, there shall be no advanced training

pay for Associate’s degrees. Advanced training pay for employees hired after September 11, 2006
will only be paid in accordance with the above schedule for Bachelor’s and Master’s degrees,
ARTICLE VI
OFF-DUTY COURT TIME
AND
MAGISTRATES' HEARINGS

1, A Police Officer who, during off-duty hours, is required to appear for court time
shall be paid al the rate of time and one half, for a minimum of 4 hours and shall retain all witness
fees and mileage allowance.

2. A Police Officer who, during off-duty hours, is required to appear at a Magistrate's
hearing on a criminal case related to police work, shall be compensated for time worked, Officers

are puaranteed a two (2) hour minimum at time and one half. Officers shall be entitled to keep all

witness fees and mileage allowances.

(DocNo=00586018.2 } 4
3. When a Police Officer is required to appear during off-duty hours to sign a
complaint with the District Magistrate, he/she shall be paid two (2) hours at time-and-one-half of
his/her regular hourly rate.

ARTICLE VII
HOURS OF WORK, OVERTIME

SHIFT ASSIGNMENTS AND
OTHER WORKING CONDITIONS

 

 

 

L. All Police Officers shall work eight consecutive hours, which shall constitute a
day's work, and forty hours, which shall constitute a week, made up of five eight-hour days, subject
to the provisions of Paragraph 11 hereof.

2. All Police Officers shall receive pay at the rate of time-and-one-half, with a four-
hour minimum (which four-hour minimum shall not apply to overtime which immediately
precedes or follows a regular shift) for all time worked in excess of eight hours in any regular work
day and/or forty hours in any work week subject to the provisions of Sections 9 and 10 hereof.

3, a. All Police Officers may choose to receive compensatory time in lieu of overtime
pay at the rate of 1 % hours for each hour of overtime worked, but in no event shall an officer be
permitted to accumulate more than thirty-two (32) overtime hours, which equates to forty-eight
(48) hours of compensatory time.

b. Officers wishing to use accumulated compensatory time shall request to do so at
least three (3) work days prior to posting of the work schedule.
c. Scheduled vacation days and personal days have priority over requested

compensatory time off.

{DoeNo-GOS86018.2 } 5
d. Any accumulated, unused compensatory time held by an officer as of November
30 of each calendar year shall be paid for by the employer in the first pay of December of each
year at the officer’s regular rate of pay.

e, Compensatory time shall begin to accumulate on December | of each year for the
next succeeding twelve (12) months, but compensatory time cannot be used in December,

f, Compensatory time may only be used when it does not tigger overtime
opportunities.

g. A record of compensatory time accumulated and used shall be kept by the
employer, with the hours being checked on a periodic basis.

4. Only Police Officers, as defined in this Agreement, shal! be chosen for all overtime
shift assignments, unless a sufficient number of Police Officers are not available.

5. In the event that there is no sergeant, detective, or lieutenant on duty during any
regular shift, the senior qualified Police Officer on the shift shall be assigned sergeant duties and
shall be paid at a rate equal to that of a sergeant.

6, All overtime shall be divided equally among all Police Officers. For the purpose
of daily overtime, that is, overtime into the next following shift, such overtime shall be equally
divided among all Police Officers on the preceding shift.

7, Shift assignments shall not, under any circumstances, be made for disciplinary or
punilive purposes.

8. All shift schedules must be posted at least two weeks before they go into effect.
Once posted, shift assignments shall not be changed except in case of emergency, or by mutual

consent of the Township and the affected Police Officer.

{DocNo-00S86018.2 } 6
9. Individual Police Officers, may, by mutual agreement among themselves, change
shifts with one another, or fill in for each other, subject to the Township's prior approval; however,
due to recent application of the Fair Labor Standards Act and the regulations thereunder to the
Township, such shift changes and fill-ins shall not be permitted if overtime results therefrom,

10. The Police recognize that, subject to the limitations contained in this Agreement,
the Township has the right to schedule hours of work and shift assignments and may institute a
"ten-plan" work schedule.

11, A “ten-plan" work schedule is defined as a forty (40) hour work week made up of
four ten-hour days, as opposed to a forty (40) hour work week made up of five (5) eight (8) hour
days.

12, The Township agrees that if it institutes a "ten-plan" work schedule for this Police
Department, it will do so subject to the following conditions:

a) No Police Officer shall be required to work less than eight (8) consecutive hours in

any regularly scheduled work day (as distinguished from an overtime day). No

Police Officer shall be required to work more than ten (10) hours in any regularly
scheduled work day without payment of overtime.

b) No Police Officer shall be laid off as a part of, or because of, the new schedule.

c) Each Police Officer shali be entitled to at least two (2) consecutive days off per
week.

d) Work schedule shail be posted for not less than one (1) month at a time.

e) Ninety (90) days after the new schedule has been in effect, the Township's

representatives (including not less than two (2) members of the Board of
Commissioners) shall meet with representatives of the Police to discuss and make
a bona fide attempt to resolve any problems which the Police are having with the
new schedule.

{DocNo=G0586018 2 } 7
13. In the event of a call off, officers have the choice to call other officers who are not
scheduled that day, based on the current doubie out block schedule, The following order will be
utilized with staffing the shift:

a) The officers on the shift preceding the call off will have the option of working the
shift based on the double out block schedule.

b) If no officer elects to accept the double out, they will have the option to contact
officers who are not scheduled that day and who are eligible for overtime utilizing
the double out block system,

c) If no eligible officer from the double out block system accepts the overtime, the
officers on the shift following the call off can agree to report to work 4 hours early
to accept half of the call off shift. This overtime will also follow the double out
block system. If this option is followed, the first eligible officer from the preceding
shift is required to stay and work the first 4 hours of the call off shift.

d) If no officers agree to the overtime as outlined above, the first eligible officer from
the preceding shift will be required to work the 8 hour call of f shift.

14. For the first twelve (12) months of a full-time officer's employment, the Township
shall determine all schedules, shifts and assignments of that officer at its discretion, except that
split shifts shall not be permitted. This provision is subject to the terms of Article VII, Section 7,
and shall not be applied for the purpose of disciplining any officer.

ARTICLE VIII

UNIFORM ALLOWANCE AND EQUIPMENT

 

1. Police Officers (other than “new hires” as further described below in this Article),
will be entitled to an annual uniform allowance of $850.00. The Township has established a
quartermaster system for this benefit whereby Police Officers will apply their annual uniform
allowance to uniforms and/or equipment obtained through this quartermaster system. In the event
that, in a particular calendar year, an officer does not utilize all of his/her allowance through

purchases made under the quartermaster system, then the officer shall receive the difference

{DocNo=00586018 2 } 8
between the amount spent under the quartermaster system and the maximum annual allowance.
Such cash payment will be included in the last pay period of November each calendar year, Any
purchases made after the cash payment date in November for that calendar year will be deducted
from the future year’s payment. However, in no case will an officer be entitled to receive more
than $250.00 in cash payment of his/her uniform allowance in a calendar year. For example, if an
officer incurs only $350.00 of costs through the quartermaster system, the officer’s cash payment
shall be limited to $250.00. Alternately, if an officer spends over $600.00 but less than $850.00,
through the quartermaster system, he/she will be paid the difference between the amount spent and
the annual allowance. Any cash payment to the officer under this provision will be taxed in
accordance with IRS regulations, if such taxation is required.

2. All new hires will receive $1,200.00 for a uniform allowance available on his/her
hire date. There will be no uniform allowance cash payment to a new hire during their first year
of employment. Additionally, any new officer hired after July 1* of any calendar year will receive
the previously referenced $1,200.00 uniform allowance, but will not be entitled to uniform
allowance the following year.

3. In the event that a Police Officer damages their clothing in the course of the
performance of their assigned duties, reimbursement for such damaged article shall be provided
by the Township upon presentation of the damaged item of clothing and an invoice for the
replacement item.

4, If the Township mandates any changes in uniform during the term of this

Agreement, the Township shall pay for such mandated uniform changes.

{DocNo=00586018.2 § 9
ARTICLE IX

OFE-DUTY EMPLOYMENT

 

lL. The Township agrees that any Police Officer may do any lawful work for pay
during his/her off-duty hours for any employer except such employers who have retail liquor
licenses, pursuant to the policy set forth in Resolution No. 5-69, provided, however, that such off-
duty work shall not exceed a total of four hours on any working day, except for a working day
which is immediately followed by a day off, and provided further that such off-duty work shall in
no event exceed a total of thirty-one (31) hours a week.

2. The Police Officers waive any and all claim to Exclusive Use Pay and any and all
rights to bring any grievance, and/or action for damages or other compensation for those off-duty
hours during which they may not work under the limitations set forth above.

ARTICLE X
SICK LEAVE

1. It is mutually agreed by and between the parties that the express intent of sick leave
is to protect an Officer ftom wage loss due to illness. It is understood by the Township and the
Police that sick leave is a benefit earned by service to be available when and ifneeded. Sick leave
is intended to provide eligible police employees with continuation of wages when absent due to
the employee’s illness or accident. Except for those additional reasons expressly set forth in this
Section, sick leave is not intended to be used for any absence or any other reason than illness or
accident of the employee.

2. To utilize sick leave, a Police Officer shall notify the immediate supervisor or other
designated person no later than two (2) hours prior to the Officer’s scheduled starting time, except

in cases of emergency or onset of illness or occurrence of accident less than two hours before the

{DocNo=00586018.2 } 1 0
scheduled starting time, in which case such notification shali be made as immediately as
practicable.

3, Sick leave may also be granted for up to three days in the event that a male officer's
spouse gives birth to a child. Female officers who give birth shall be entitled to use their sick leave
for this purpose. At the sole discretion of the Township, an officer may use his/her sick leave in
the event of a serious illness of a spouse or child.

4, As of January 1, 2009, each Police Officer shall be entitled to the following number

of paid sick leave days in addition to all accumulated sick leave:

 

 

Period of Annual Sick Leave Annual Sick Leave
Service On “Ten-Plan” on the basis of an
- Schedule 8-hour day
90 days to | year 40 hours 5 days
1 to 2 years 80 hours 10 days
2 to 3 years 120 hours 15 days
3 years and over 150 hours 16 days
5. For employees hired before January 1, 2019, all unused sick leave shall be

accumulated from year to year, up to a maximum of one hundred thirty (130) days. For employees
hired on or after January 1, 2019, all unused sick leave shall be accumulated from year to year, up
to a maximum of ninety (90) days. Sick leave so accumulated shall not be lost or forteited except
through use thereof or purchase by the Township as set forth below.

6. If a Police Officer has accumulated sick leave of anywhere from 114 to 130 days,
on December 31 of each year, the Township shall buy back from each Police Officer at thirty
percent (30%) pay at each Police Officer’s prevailing rate of pay, the number of unused sick days
up to an annual allocation of 16 days, On January 1" of each year, cach Police Officer shall again

be entitled to a specific number of paid sick leave days in accordance with the schedule set forth

{DocNo)0586018 2 } 1 1
in Article 10, Section 4, to a maximum accumulation of one hundred thirty (130) days for officers
hired prior to January 1, 2019 or ninety (90) days for officers hired on or after January 1, 2019.
The number of sick days allocated to a Police Officer on January 1* shall be reduced on a prorated
basis should the officer retire, resign or be terminated in the same year as the allocation. For
example, if an officer resigns on June 30, his allocated sick days would be reduced on a prorated
basis for actual time worked.

7. At death or retirement, the Township shall buy back all unused sick leave up to a
maximum of one hundred thirty (130) days for officers hired prior to January 1, 2019 or ninety
(90) days for officers hired on or after January 1, 2019 at the rate of fifty (50%) percent of a given
Police Officer’s then prevailing daily rate of pay for each day of sick leave. Should the Township
apply a higher percentage buy-back to any non-bargaining unit Township Police Officers then the
buy-back percentage applicable to bargaining unit police officers shall increase to match that
applicable to non-bargaining unit police officers. In the event of a Police Officer’s death, this
amount will be given to the bencficiary designated by him/her to receive his/her death benefits
under Article XVI, Paragraph 2 hereof, which death benefits shall be paid in addition to any
payments for purchase of unused sick leave as provided for herein,

8. Thirty (30) days of catastrophic sick leave will be available to all Police Officers
who, due to illness or injury, exhaust all available sick leave days.

ARTICLE XI
HOLIDAYS
1, Each Police Officer shall be entitled to ten (10) paid personal holidays a year, the

said holidays to be scheduled by mutual agreement, subject to the limitations in Paragraph 2 of

{DocNo=00586018.2 J ] 2
this Article. The Police shall not be entitled to additional compensation for working on national
or state holidays. Only two holidays can be carried over into the month of December,

Officers shall also receive two (2) personal days. Only one (1) personal day may be used
per shift. Personal days may be used at any time upon giving the officer’s supervisor seventy-two
(72) hours notice, if practical,

2. For pension and termination of employment purposes only, each Police Officer
shall be deemed to accrue five (5) days of his/her holidays in the period January | through June 30
and five (5) of his/her holidays from July 1 through December 31 in the year of their retirement or
termination. Lf any holidays are not taken at the request of the ‘Township, and the Police Officer
is unable to reschedule them within the above specified time periods, the Police Officer shall be
permitted to either carry such unused holidays over into the next year or be paid at time-and-one-
half rates for the said unused holidays, the choice to be the Township's.

ARTICLE XH

 

VACATIONS
1, Each Police Officer shall be entitled to an annual vacation in accordance with the
following schedule:
Years of Continuous Annual Vacation Annual Vacation
Service on a “ten-plan” on basis of an
schedule 8-hour day
0 to 1 year 0 Hours 0 Days
After 1 year 80 Hours 10 Days
After 5 years 120 Hours 15 Days
After 10 years 160 Hours 20 Days
After 15 years 168 Hours 21 Days
After 18 years 176 Hours 22 Days
After 20 years 200 Hours 25 Days
After 25 years 240 Hours 30 Days

(DocNoG0586018.2 } | 3
2. Those entitled to one hundred twenty (120) hours or fifteen (15) eight-hour days or
more of vacation may, at their option, take forty (40) of their vacation hours or five (5) eight-hour
days, a day at a time, scheduling permitting, and with the approval of the Chief of Police.

ARTICLE X11
BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

I. When a death occurs in the immediate family of a Police Officer or the immediate
family of a Police Officer’s spouse, he/she shall be entitled to a leave of absence, at their regular
rate of pay for the three (3) days immediately following the date of death,

2. In the event that a Police Officer needs additional days because of the aforesaid
death to attend to the needs of the family, he/she may take one (1) or more of their regular off-duty
days or paid holidays or vacation days to extend their absence. The intent of this provision is to
protect an employee against a loss in earnings. Thus, the maximum of three (3) days leave of
absence in the event of a death in the Police Officer’s or spouse's immediate family is not a
guarantee of three (3) paid days off. Payment shall be made only for those days the Police Officer
was scheduled to work,

3, "Immediate family" is defined as spouse, mother, father, sister, brother, and child,
or spouse of any of the aforesaid.

4, Bereavement leave will include one day in the event of the death of an Officer's
grandparent or grandchild for the purpose of funeral attendance only. The Township may request

reasonable proof of the death and/or attendance.

{DocNo-G0586018.2 } i4
ARTICLE XIV
JURY DUTY

1. Any Police Officer called to serve on jury duty while on duty shall be excused from
reporting to work without suffering any loss of pay for so long as he/she is required for jury duty;
provided, however, the Township shail only pay the said Police Officer their regular pay, less any
amount of compensation they may receive lor serving on jury duty,

2. When a Police Officer is called to serve on jury duty when the service is not work
related, and the Police Officer is scheduled to work the 24 hour period prior to having to report for
jury duty on either the 12 midnight to 8:00 a.m. shift or the 4:00 p.m. to 12 midnight shift, then
that officer is excused from working that assigned shift. This time off shall be with pay provided

the Police Officer provides verification of the jury duty assignment to the Township.

ARTICLE XV
MEDICAL AND HEALTH INSURANCE

1, The Township, at its sole cost, shall provide Police Officers with Select Blue, a
Blue Cross and Blue Shield PPO coverage for them and their families including dependent children
to age 23 while attending school full time. Benefits are outlined as per Attachment “A”.

2. The Township shall provide, at its sole cost, High Option Dental Coverage and
High Option Optical Coverage for Police Officers and their families, on terms equivalent to the
coverage presently enjoyed by Township management employees.

3, Effective January 1, 2013, and annually thereafter effective January 1 of each

succeeding year, each Police Officer with health insurance coverage shal! continue to pay 15% of

{DocNo-G0586018.2 } 15
the annual increase in the cost of health insurance coverage from 2012. This 15% will be in

addition to the following rates in effect as of January 1, 2012:

Single 29,84 monthly
Husband/Wife 78.54 monthly
Parent/Child 70.62 monthly
Parent/Children 70.62 monthly
Family 89.62 monthly

An example of the calculation is attached hereto as Attachment A. Officers shall pay the
annual increase through pro-rata bi-weekly payroll deductions.

4. Effective January 1, 2007, and annually thereafter effective January 1 of each
succeeding year, each Police Officer with vision and dental insurance coverage shall be required
to pay 15% of the annual increase in the cost of vision and dental insurance coverage, respectively,
over the cost of such coverage in calendar year 2005 through pro-rata bi-weekly payroll
deductions. Officer contributions shall increase in the same manner as increases for health
insurance premium contributions.

5. The Township shall have the right to change the medical, surgical and
hospitalization insurance existing on December 31, 2005, to a plan which is substantially
comparable to the coverage begin provided as of that date. “Substantially comparable” as used in
this provision does not mean “exactly the same.”

6. The Police retain the right to grieve the Township’s determination that a pian is
“substantially comparable.” If the Police do not agree that the plan selected by the Township is
“substantially comparable,” the Police will so state, in writing, to the Township. In that event, the
Township may not unilaterally implement the proposed new plan; however, in the absence of

agreement, the Parties immediately shall process the dispute before a neutral Arbitrator selected

{DocNo-O0S86018.2 } | 6
pursuant to the Arbitration Step of the grievance procedure for expedited determination. The
expedited decision of the Arbitrator as to whether the plan proposed by the Township is or is not
“substantially comparable,” shall be issued within forty-five (45) calendar days of the Police
written notice contesting the plan selected and shall be final and binding as a determination of
whether the Township is or is not authorized to implement the proposed plan.

7, The Township agrees to provide Police Officers who retire hereafter, and their
spouses, from date of retirement to date of eligibility for Medicare, with medical and health
insurance which, to the extent available, (even at additional cost) is not inferior in benefits to the
medical and health insurance enjoyed by regular full-time Police. However, after April 1, 2001,
if a retiree and/or spouse who is eligible for these medical and health insurance benefits, should
move his/her domicile to a location not serviced by the health care network which provides medical
and health insurance coverage to current Shaler Township Police retirees, with the result that the
premium cost for the coverage exceeds the cost Shaler Township would pay if the retiree and/or
his/her spouse had not changed the location of his/her domicile, then the retiree will pay the first
$250.00 per month of health insurance premium which exceeds the cost of the premium that Shaler
pays for retirees who have stayed geographically close to Shaler anc “in-network”, If the
additional costs of the premiums for this out of network coverage, caused by the moving of the
domicile, exceeds $250.00 per month, then Shaler Township shall absorb those additional costs
which are above the $250.00 per month cost to the employee.

8. If the widow/widower of a police retiree remarries, health insurance from the
Township will cease upon the remarriage date.

9, Thereafter, as each retired Police Officer or his/her spouse reach the age of

eligibility for Medicare coverage under Federal Social Security statutes and regulations, to the

{DocNo=00586038.2 | 17
extent that any such person does not have (Medicare) coverage through other employment, the
Township agrees that it will purchase, at its expense, full Medicare coverage for each retired Police
Officer and his/her spouse from date of cligibility to date of death. So long as the Township is
paying for the aforesaid Medicare coverage, the Township may deduct from the monthly pension
payment of each retired Police Officer and his/her spouse, from the date Medicare is so provided
to date of death, an amount equivalent to that monthly amount which persons who are covered by
Social Security are required to pay for Medicare coverage.

10. Inthe event that the Township at some future date agrees, or is required, to provide
full Social Security coverage for its police employces, the Township shall not thereafter be
required to purchase Medicare coverage for those of its Police Officers and their respective spouses
who are eligible for Medicare coverage through Social Security coverage with which the Township
has provided them.

11. Police Officers hired on or after January 1, 2013, shall not be eligible for post-
retirement health care or any such benefits described in paragraphs 7 through 10 of this Article
XV.

12. Effective January 1, 1987, the Township may offer voluntary incentives to police
officers to reduce health care costs. The parties agree to meet and discuss said proposals but no
change will be implemented or be binding on the parties unless made in writing and signed by
authorized representatives of the Township and Police.

13. At the request of either party, at any time during the terms of the agreement,
representatives of the Police and of the Township may meet in order to discuss the implementation

of a flexible benefits plan, or the substitution of comparable medical insurance coverage for the

{DoeNo=00586018 2 } 1 g
present Select Blue coverage. No change will be implemented or be binding on the parties unless
it is made in writing and signed by authorized representatives of the Township and Police.

14. Cadillac Tax Avoidance. If the Township receives notice or information indicating
that its health care plan costs will subject the plan to the Affordable Care Act's "Cadillac Tax"
excise tax, the Township will give the Union written notice of that fact and the parties will
immediately meet to discuss changes in the plan design, plan and/or plan carrier in order to avoid
the imposition of the tax. If no agreement is reached within fourteen (14) days of the Township's
written notice to the Union regarding this issue, then the parties will proceed to an expedited
arbitration proceeding with an arbitrator selected pursuant to the terms of the Collective Bargaining
Agreement's grievance and arbitration procedure. The sole purpose for that expedited arbitration
proceeding will be for the arbitrator to modify the plan, plan design and/or plan carrier in order to
eliminate the exposure to the Cadillac ‘Tax. The decision of the arbitrator on this issue shall be
issued within forty-five (45) calendar days of his or her appointment.

ARTICLE XVI
LIFE INSURANCE

1, The Township shall, at its sole cost, furnish each Police Officer during the term of
this Agreement with term life insurance coverage selected by the Township in the face value of
$75,000.00 and $75,000.00 accidental death and dismemberment insurance coverage, payable to
a beneficiary to be designated by each Police Officer, This is in addition to certain survivor and
death benefits provided or to be provided in the Police Pension Plan which are payable to a spouse
or minor child in the event of a service connected death, Insurance policy will include a double

indemnity clause.

{DocNo=O0586018.2 } | 9
2. The Township shall, at its sole cost, provide each retired Police Officer with a Four
Thousand ($4,000.00) Dollar death benefit to be paid at the retired Police Officer’s death:

a) To any beneficiary designated in writing by the retired Police Officer; or if no
beneficiary is so designated, then

b) To his/her surviving spouse; or if he/she is net so survived, then
9] To the Executor or Administrator of his/her estate.
ARTICLE XVII
FALSE ARREST INSURANCE

 

The Township shall, at its sole cost, provide each Police Officer with False Arrest
Insurance coverage on terms and conditions not less favorable than those specified in False Arrest
Insurance Blanket Policy 54GA-631-498-0003, which may be purchased through the Fraternal
Order of Police.

ARTICLE XVII
ERRORS AND OMISSIONS AND OTHER INSURANCE

The Township, at its sole cost, shall provide each Police Officer with errors and omissions

liability insurance coverage on terms not less favorable than heretofore provided.
ARTICLE XIX
SOCIAL SECURITY RE-OPENER

If, during the term of this Agreement, the Federal Government opens the Social Security
Program so as to allow Police Officers to be covered thereunder, the Township shall notify the
Police who shall have the option of re-opening this Agreement at that lime for the purpose of
negotiating if and/or how Social Security coverage is to be provided for the Police, If this

Agreement, is so re-opened and both parties are unable to arrive at an agreement, the Police may

{DocNo-O0586018 2 } 20
proceed to arbitrate this issue as a wage demand in accordance with the terms of Act 111, provided,
however, if Social Security opens up after September 12 in any year and the United States
Congress requires that an election be made prior to October 31 of the following year, this
Agreement shall constitute notice of intent to arbitrate in full satisfaction of the notice requirements
of Act 111.

ARTICLE XX

SCHOOLING

i. In the event any Police Officer is required by the Township to attend school, the
Township shall pay all costs and reasonable expenses. |

2. It is mutually agreed by and between the parties that the Township may send a
Police Officer for up to 32 hours of training a year which shall be compensated with compensatory
time in strict compliance with the provisions and limitations of Article VII, Section 3.
Compensation for schooling/training shall not be less than four hours at time and one-half,

ARTICLE XXI
PENSION

L. In accordance with the provisions of Purdon’s Pennsylvania Statutes, 53 P.S., 761
et seq., the Township shall provide each Police Officer with the following pension benefits under
the following terms and conditions:

A, The monthly benefit of any Police Officer retiring on or after January 1, 1982, shall
be fifiy (50%) percent of his/her average salary (excluding uniform pay) averaged over the last
thirty-six (36) months of the Police Officer’s aggregate service prior to retirement. Additionally,
effective January 1, 1985, with 26 or more years of aggregate service, a Police Officer shall receive

an additional $100.00 per month,

fDocNo-00586018.2 } 1
B. The pension rights of all Police Officers who have completed twelve (12) or more
years of aggregate service shall be vested in accordance with the formula set forth in the 1974
Amendment to Act 600 (Act of April 11, P. L. 250 No. 61:53 P.S. (Supp.) 771, last paragraph).

C, All existing pension benefits of the existing ordinance and Pension Plan will remain
unchanged for the term of this Agreement unless the Township is required by law to make a change
in the benefits, in which case the Unenforceability Clause, Article XXTV, hereof, will be invoked
by the Police Officers to secure a fair economic equivalent as set forth therein.

D. The parties recognize that a controversy presently exists between them concerning
in alleged reduction of benefits and the change in funding of the Police Pension Plan in 1971. It
is expressly understood and agreed that by entering into this agreement, the Police Officers shall
not be deemed to have waived any legal or equitable rights and/or remedies that they may have
arising out of or in any way related to the changes made by the Township in the benefits and/or
funding of the Police Pension Plan of 1971, except the question of post retirement death benefits
and disability benefits to the extent either of these is or has been affected by changes made by the
Township in the benefits and/or funding of the Police Pension Plan in 1971.

E, Upon the execution date of this contract, it is agreed by both parties that this
contract may be re-opened for negotiation, only to discuss changes in the police pension plan,
unless agreed upon otherwise by both parties.

2. Effective April 1, 2001, any police officer hired after that effective date shall, upon
retirement, enjoy a final average salary calculation which does not include any hump sum payments
made to that police officer as a result of the sick leave accumulation buy back (severance) benefit.
However, as to all police officers employed on or before April 1, 2001, the historic utilization of

that sick leave buy back (severance) benefit, in computing said officer’s final average salary for

{DocNo=09586018.2 } 22
pension calculation purposes, shall continue without modification. ‘This means that, as to officers
hired on or prior to April 1, 2001, if at the time of their retirement, police officers are making a
contribution to the police pension plan, then that percentage level of contribution shall be applied
to the sick leave buy-out amount. If, at the time they retire, police officers are not making any
contribution to the Pension Plan, that fact shall not cause presently active officers to forego
inclusion of their sick leave severance benefit in their final average salary calculation, However,
for police officers hired after April 1, 2001, any police officer contribution percentage in effect
when said officer retires shall not apply to any sick leave buy-out/severance amount due that
officer.

3. All officers shall contribute to the Police Pension Plan up to the maximum amount
permitted by Act 600, 53 P.S. § 767, et seq. If the Police Pension Plan actuary, however, on a
yearly basis and based upon the most recent Act 205 actuarial valuation report, determines that
some lesser amount is sufficient to maintain the actuarial soundness of the Police Pension Plan
without requiring the Township to contribute any General Fund monies into the Police Pension
Plan for the applicable calendar year, then the Township may reduce the need for police officers
to make contributions into the police pension fund, on such annual basis, by ordinance or
resolution. Provided, however, that the contribution rate may not be reduced below three per
centum of monthly compensation.

4. An annual cost of living adjustment shall be provided to retired police officers, who
retired after April 1, 2001, subject to the limitations set forth herein. The adjustment shall not
exceed the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index from the year in which the police
officer last worked, Provided further, that in no case shall the total police pension benefits exceed

seventy-five (75%) percent of the retired police officer’s salary for computing retirement benefits.

'DocNo=t0586018.2 | 23
And provided further that the retired police officer's total cost of living adjustment shall not exceed
twenty-five (25%) percent of the retiree’s original pension benefit. Effective January 1, 2003, the
limitation on the total cost of living adjustment shall not exceed thirty 30%) percent of the retiree’s
original pension benefit; provided, however, that an actuarial study by the Plan Actuary confirms
that said increase in the total cost of living adjustment will not negatively impact the actuarial
soundness of the Plan nor require the Township to contribute any general fund monies into the
Plan.

5. The Police Pension Plan shall provide a disability benefit in the event of a police
officer’s total and permanent disability resulting from in-service related injuries. The disability
benefit shall provide that such disabled police officer will receive a disability pension calculated
at seventy-five (75%) percent of the officer's final average annual salary over the officer’s final
thirty-six (36) months of active service. Police officers who mect the age and service requirements
for an undiminished, non-disability, superannuation pension benefit shall not be eligible for a
disability pension. It is not the intent of this language that any officer receiving a disability pension

should thereafter have that disability pension reduced.

ARTICLE XXII
DISABILITY BENEFITS
The Township shall provide the Police Officers with all the disability benefits, under all
the terms and conditions specified in the Agreement between the parties dated August 23, 1972,
as supplemented and amended by the Amendatory Agreement between the parties dated February
12, 1974.
The Township shall insure, or self-insure, a standard Short Term Disability benefit. The

basic terms of the benefit shall include the following:

{DocNoO0586018.2 } 24
The benefit is applicable to disabilities arising out of non-work related injuries or illnesses; when
receiving payment pursuant to this benefit a Police Officer shall receive income equal to 70% of
his/her straight time base (gross) pay; annually, the benefit shall in general terms, provide up to 52
consecutive weeks of disability benefits; an employee shall be eligible for the benefit, if he/she
meets the policy definition of being “disabled”, starting with the first day of accident and the
seventh day of illness or any other situation which meets the policy definition of disability. A
purchased policy of disability insurance shall be enforced according to its terms. Should the
Township determine to self-insure, the benefit will be provided in accordance with the terms ofa
standard Short Term Disability Insurance Policy. For any officer who has accumulated 20 or more
days of sick leave, such officer will be required to utilize a minimum of ten of those accumulated
sick leave days prior to becoming eligible to utilize the Short Term Disability policy. Any Police
Officer who has not accumulated 20 sick leave days will not be required to use any of his/her sick
leave days as a pre-condition to being eligible for the Short Term Disability benefit. However,
any officer who suffers a non-work related disability will be permitted to utilize any or all of his/her
accumulated sick leave days prior to seeking coverage under the Short Term Disability benefit,
but no officer may simultaneously utilize his/her sick leave benefit and the Short Term Disability
benefit.

The Township shall continue to provide Long Term Disability benefits consistent with the
currently effective Group Long Term Disability Policy (Policy No. 1309719-A), which provides,
in part, that long term disability benefits shall be offset by pension benefits (including normal,
early and disability) as well as any other disability income received by the officer as a result of a
benefit from the Township. Such long-term disability benefits shall terminate in a manner

consistent with the terms of coverage under the policy in effect as of December 31, 2017. This

{DoeNo=00586018 2 j 25
4018 Act 11 Interest Arbitration Award dees not provide for offsets or for termination of benefits

other than as set forth in the language of that current policy.

ARTICLE XXIII

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

 

1. For the purpose of this Agreement, the term "srievance" shall mean any difference
or dispute between the Township and any Police Officer with respect to the interpretation,
application, claim of breach, or violation of any of the provisions of this Agreement.

2. Should a grievance arise between the Township and a Police Officer, there shall be
no suspension of work on account of such grievance, but the grievance shall be settled in
accordance with the grievance procedure hereinafter set forth.

3. The Police shall designate to the Manager of the Township a Grievance Committee
composed of not more than three (3) Police Officers, one (1) of whom shall be designated
Chairman.

4, Any Police Officer having a grievance shall first discuss the grievance with his/her
superior in the chain of command. If, after such discussion, the issue is not resolved, he/she may
file a written grievance on a form agreed upon by the parties to this agreement. If the Grievance
Committee finds merit in the grievance, it will process the grievance to the next step. T he
following grievance steps shall be followed:

a) The written grievance shall be given to the Manager of the Township within ten
(10) days from the occurrence of the event giving rise to the grievance, and it shall be considered
in a meeting within seven (7) days thereafter by an authorized representative of the

Commissioners, the Manager, the Chairman of the Grievance Committee, and the aggrieved Police

(DocNo=00586018 2 } 26
Officer, Within seven (7) days thereafter, a decision shall be made by an authorized representative
of the Commissioners.

b) If the issue is not resolved, the aggricved Police Officer and the Grievance
Committee may jointly request an arbitration under the rules of the American Arbitration
Association. The arbitrator's decision must be rendered within thirty (30) days after the hearing.
The parties agree to abide by the arbitrator's decision, which shall not be subject to review unless
the arbitrator exceeds the scope of his/her lawful authority.

5. Each Police Officer as of January 1 of each calendar year shall contribute the sum
of Twenty ($20.00) Dollars to the "Police Officers Arbitration Fund," until the balance in said fund
‘s at least One Thousand Five Hundred ($1,500.00) Dollars. Thereafter, the Police shall not
contribute anything to the said fund unless the balance therein is less than One ‘Thousand Five
Hundred ($1,500.00) Dollars, in which event, each Police Officer shall contribute annually such
an amount as will bring the said balance up to One Thousand Five Hundred ($1,500.00) but not
more than a maximum annual contribution of Twenty ($20.00) Dollars per person. The said fund
shall at all times remain in the possession and under the control of the Police.

6. The expenses and fees incident to the services of the impartial arbitrator for the
arbitration of any grievance shall be divided equally between, and borne equally by, the Township
and the Police Officers Arbitration Fund until the monies in said fund are exhausted, after which
time the aforesaid expenses shall be borne entirely by the Township. In no event shall the Police
be required to bear any of the expenses and fees incident to the services of any impartial arbitrator
in excess of the monies in the Police Officers Arbitration Fund. Any monies remaining in the said

Fund at the end of a calendar year shall be allowed to remain therein and carried over from year to

(DocNo=00586018.2 | 27
year, to be used pursuant to the terms thercof, regardless of the level of contributions by the Police
in subsequent years.

7. The grievance, as stated in the request for arbitration, shall constitute the sole and
entire subject matter to be heard by the arbitrator, unless the parties agree mutually to modify the
scope of the issue. The number of grievances which can be submitted to the arbitrator shall be
limited to one (1) grievance per arbitration hearing unless otherwise agreed to by both parties. The
arbitrator shall have no power to alter, amend, change, add to, or subtract from any of the terms of
this Agreement, but shall determine only whether or not there has been a misinterpretation,
misapplication, breach, or violation of this Agreement. ‘The decision of the arbitrator shall be
based solely on the evidence and arguments presented to him/her by the representative parties in
the presence of each other.

8, If the Township has a grievance, it shall take it to the Grievance Committee, and,
if not resolved to the Township's satisfaction, the Township shall be entitled to arbitration in the
manner and pursuant to the terms set forth in this Article.

9, Extension of time limits at each step shall be only by mutual consent of the
Township and Police representatives.

10. The Township shall not be obligated to pay any member of the Grievance
Committee, the Chairman, and/or aggrieved Police Officer for time spent in processing grievances,
grievance meetings, or arbitration hearings, if such meetings occur at a time other than scheduled

shifts.

{DocNo-O0SS6018 2 j 28

 
ARTICLE XXIV
POSSIBLE MERGER WITH OTHER DEPARTMENTS
With regards to the possible merger of the Shaler Township Police Department with one
or more of the police departments of Etna Borough, Millvale Borough or Reserve Township, or
with regards to the possibility that Etna, Millvale or Reserve Township would contract with Shaler
Township for police services, any Police Officer that is absorbed from one of these communities
by Shaler Township, as a Shaler Police Officer, will enter the Shaler Township Police Department
at the bottom of the seniority list. Any time worked by a Shaler Township Police Officer for
another public safety agency shall not be counted, for any purpose covered by the Collective

Bargaining Agreement, as time worked in Shaler ‘Township.

ARTICLE XXV
UNENFORCEABILITY CLAUSE
If any economic benefit provided for in this or any Agreements or awards between the
Township and its Police Officers shall be deemed unlawful and/or unenforceable by the Township
and/or any court, the Police Officer shall be entitled to a fair economic equivalent of the lost
benefit, to be arrived at by mutual agreement between the Township and the Police; or, if they are
unable to agree, their dispute as to what is a fair economic equivalent shall be resolved by binding
arbitration under the terms of Chapter 73A of the Pennsylvania Judicial Code, as amended to date,
42 Pa. C.S.A, $87301-7320.
ARTICLE XXVI
PROBATIONARY POLICE OFFICERS

The probationary period shall last for one (1) year.

{Doche=005860)8.2 } 99
ARTICLE XXVI
RESIDUAL RIGHTS
It is recognized that there are certain established working conditions which would remain
in effect for the term of this collective bargaining agreement. Ifthe circumstances which gave rise
to those working conditions change, the Township may eliminate those conditions. If the Police
believe the circumstances which gave rise to the established working conditions have not changed
so as to result in their elimination, they may file a grievance within thirty (30) days of being

notified by the Township of the change and grieve the dispute under the grievance procedure.

ARTICLE XXVHI
CIVIL SERVICE
Nothing contained in this Agreement shall be construed to affect the provisions of law
regarding appointments, suspensions, reduction and discharge of Police as found in the provisions

of the Police Civil Service Act.

ARTICLE XXIX
RESIDENCY
Effective January 1, 2019, as a condition of employment, bargaining unit members shall

be required to reside within ten (10) air miles of 300 Wetzel Road, Shaler Township.

{DoeNo=00586018.2 } 30
SIGNATURES

IN WITNESS WHEREOT, the parties hereto have hereunto set their hands and seals this

 

 

 

2A day of Narre; 2019,
ATTEST: x TOWNSHIP OF SHALER
fo
ich oth By: A Sto. sei
/ i
WITNESS: TOWNSHIP OF SHALER

POLICE WAGE AND POLICY COMMITTEE

SS

x

“eQuk PD

 

 

 

 

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE SIHALER POLICE DEPARTMENT

{DocNo-00586018.2 } 3 ]

 
Lees

a

See

aed

ssoz)
vOLLL
OG LL §

6e 48
oo 8

ae

Ape 4
ZvPee

WSO:

$
268 8
EEBOE LS
zo'se | $

 

grcog $

LZ6Z6'LS
SLECLLS

296s 6S

Ayes

“SSeS:

rors $
see $
gs'9z $

POELL
OS*LL $
6e'Z8 $
ogg $
oy PUegsnH

82'60b- $
86°e

  

vE ee

SESAL

6L60'4 g
SP Los" $
$

Pees

SyUM/puegsn}

She Se

2c 6r $

8e"e

we

SS'92 $
POLEL
OS LL $

6e"48
oss

uaaplYyonuaed

 

g3°Sob

Zz00G'1
LE LPS LE

eg'oe

uaipyoAuered

VW AI WWXA

AHO

Oo BH WH tH

ce BY
86°E

GS 9%
PO LEY

OS LL

6e48
og'e

$
$

prugauaed

EP'e6

eo's

SB ES™

e904

veered:

Se'eSL

22'00$'t
AE LPS E

29°02

$

A.

fF Ae FF &

pHUdAUaied

al
om

sv0z = $
£20 $
28° $
LO'SE

BLS $
ecee $
02's $
TeNpFAIpUY
thor
b£0

rs

v3°6Z

ESE Se

weg oS
rsezo S$
ee6ss
re6e = $
jenpraipul

 

{ c's109gsa0-oN20g I

UOHINPS pews /9ADseD YEOH GLO AMBOAA Ig FEIOL
asealou (ejUIG/eAZ JO YSp
ASESIOU 1200

TWiINaad
3Aqg

SILVe 6LOZ
TvLN3q0
SAq
Salve e10e

TWINSGISAR
uOoHRNquWOD peed ‘aAq ‘O/H Apu CHW 610
tewad/ekg GLOZ/ZLOZ S825i0U JO YWSL SM

AMIBOH 6LOZ/ZLOz Sseaisul 16. %S1 Shid’
uonna ug aadodwg AjyUOP ZL0Z

 

ShOSELOS SSBQs0UY] JO'% Sp
SLOS/ZLOT Woy Sseasouy 121]0q]

SISOD SIED UWESH SLO?
SISCD HED UWESH CLO?

uoRNGUiUCD eafojduz AUOW ZLOZ

SYvd HTVZH

ZZ0Z ‘LE 2eqQuiasag Muy) gLoz ‘| Arenuer :pareg werUED
W JUSWYIeEDYy

UORNGIQUGD DED YYEIH FO
soyeys jo diysumoL
 

weisoid days ayr
ui AQUaJIND Sya.WIO ITY

 

ce
roa)

 

1 CSTESSS00=-ON20C |

 

 

966779 $ pug ueupay

96 €62'79 $ pug Aauo0y

£0°968°29 $ pig ueso7

£0°968°L9 $ PIE asl

ST'R6b'EZ $ Wap Aysdep

SZO0L'62 $ us Aauingayy

SZ'O0T'6E $ Ys janeg

6107 ul

S]29s ony Ui uUsWyowed

So'OSO'T9 $ Os T9S'6s $ LTSDT’ss $ ce't69'9S $ pT6Os’ss $ Jeak JS]
6L'E80'C9 $ ON Lrr'So $ LETSS’E9.$  96°¢67'79 $ DO'PLL‘OO $ aeak pug
POSITELS OFESETLS LpeEs’6g. S . Lo'968'Z9 S$ 90°OP2"99 $ eak pig
SVSHT'EL S$. OOSTZ Le $:: TO'SEE'SL S$. ST BEP'EL S ZSSOLTL S$ weak uyp
ZETET'SE $ OLPOT'ES S$ 9LLLOTR S$. SZOOT'EL S. BEOLT'LE S seak urs
SB'E6'7E $ 7O'2L9'06 S$. S'O9P'8E S$ _S6Z0E'98 $ COBET'Ds $ qead uig

CEN Lz0z "0Z0e 60ST B40e

 

 
ADDITIONAL BACKGROUND DOCUMENTS FOR:

Agreement between the Township of Shaler and Shaler Township Police
January 2018 — December 31, 2022
In the Mattey of the Interest Arbitration Behween )
| 3
‘SOWNSHIP OF SHALER, PENNSYEVANIA AAA 01-17-006-4388
. “AND
SHALER TOWNSHIP POLICE.

AWARD OF THE BOARD .OF ARBITRATORS
. REGARDING THE
JANUARY 1,.2018- DECEMBER 31,2022
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT |

Brian Gabriel, Esquire, Townahip-Appointed: Arbitrator
Bryan: Campbell Esquire, Polive-Appolnted Arbitrator
___, Richand WDisseo, Baquire, Impadiat Chet
 JuRIsMITON

‘The Tinpattinl Ashiteatot, Richard W: Wilssén, was notified ‘by: letter from. the

Amerloan Adbitration Association of his: selection as Chairpefson of the Board of

 

Asbifration. to hear and. décide costraet., fifatters ther in. dispute between these patties.
Pursuant to the authority contained i in Act 114 (Act of June 2A; 1968, P:L. 237, No, 111,
AS PS. §217, at. seq) the Board of ‘Arbitration convetted February 9, 2018 in a public
séssion. at which the Board acpepled. testimony: and: arguement regarding: the: potéritial
terms. and conditions: of employment. of police officers in Bhaler Township, Pennsylvania.

An oxeoutive. session was: subscqugt ty field on Mareh'7; 2018.

 

After a complete review aitd: consideration. of all the. exhibits, testimony, and
arguments, presented on behalt’ of each party, the Board has made its determination on all:
mitiers in issue, The Sindings of the-Board are sot forth below. The signatures of all or
po memes oF the Board attest to. the daot. that, at.a-minimum,.a ‘majority concurs in

cash of the individual final findings, Acvordingly, the following Award is: ishereby issued.
AWARD:
j, Article Ti, Term of Agrepment.

The-term.of fie contract abiall be five.($) years, being retroactive fo. January 1,
9018 and.continuing in effect through: Piecember 31, 2022.
“

9, Article IH. Base Annual Wage,

The base wage: for bargaining weit mitnibers shall be adjusted in
each yeat of the Agmament a3 follows:

Effective January 1, 2018: 4.0% increase:in yearly base wage .
Bifeotive January 1, 2019 - 2.304 inorease:in yearly base-wage .
Biffective Jantsiy: 1, 2020: «- 2.5 Increase: in-yoarly base wage.
" Bftective Juntiery 1, 2021: . LY Wierease th’ yearly base wage.
Effeotive Jantiaty 1,.2022: 9,30;-inerease in yeatly’basa wage.

3.. ArtideTV.. Longevity Pay

Article I shall be amended to: pravide thet, effective January’l., 2019; a as to any
‘new hire, the years of service’ increments: shall be-ds follows:

After sik (6) yours: $ 75.00 pef month
After ten (10) years: $100.00 poe miotith:
After Syn.  —- FL1S.00_permonth
After 20 years: $190.00: permonth

4 Article, Sick Leave

Ajticte: ¥, Seaton: 5, shall be ariended to- provide that, effective January L
201%, as'to any new hite, the maximum:.number oftsick leave: days that may be
accumulated from year" to: year shall, be ninety (90):sick days, Sick leave so
accotnulated shall not be fost or farieited: except through ‘use thereof of
purchaso by-the Township aa sotforth in Article-X, .

5: Article XV: Medion] and Health Insuratce Language

The following language shall be added. as anew Subparagraph of Article.

Cadillac ‘Tex Avoidance, If the Township receives
notice of information indicating that its health care
plas costg will eublect-de plan te the Affordable Cate
Aets "Cadillac "Tax". expive tax, the Township will give
the Union written notice of that: fact arid.the parties. will
immediately meet to discuss changes. in the plan.
design, plan and/ot plan. paeier in. order to avoid the
imposition-of the tax: Ifo dgrecnumntt. is reached within.
fourteen (14) days ofthe Towtship's written natics to

the Union regarding this issue, then the parties ‘will
proceed to an expedited arbitration proceeding with: en
arbitrator: adlected’ pnrstant fo the terms. of. the.
Collective Bargaiding Agreiierits  gfievance ‘and
atbitration. procedure, ‘The. sdle purpose. for that
expedited arbitration. proceeding will be: for the
aibitratot fo modify the: plan, plan design and/or plan
cattier in ordar to elittinatée- the exposure to the
Cadillac ‘Tax.-‘The: decision of the arbitrator on this.
isgio shall be issued. within foryedive. (45) calendar days.
of his or her appointment.
6, Axticle XAT. Disability Benefits

The Township. shill continue to provide Long Totm Disability benefits
consistent. with the curently effective: Giowp: Long: Term, Disability Policy
(Policy: No, Y309719-A}, whith provides, in part, that long tetin disability
bertefite shall be offset by: yenslori benefite Gacluding normal, early and
disability) as well as any other disability inconte received by-the-officer as a
result of a benefit fiom the Toiwtship, Sn¢h longterm disability benefits
shell, terminate. in a.manner-corisistent with the tonins of coverage under the
policy in effet as of Deosmber 31,-2017, This award does not provide for
- offsets ot fot termlnation-of benefits otlier than’ as set forth in. the. language of
\_ that current policy. ;

7. Residency
Effeotive January 1, 2019, as @ condition of employment, bargaliting, unit
members shall be required 16 réside within ton (10) airmiles.o a0 eee
Road, Shalet Township.

8. Hours of ‘Work, Overtime, Shift Assignments aad “Other ‘Working
‘Conditions .

Aatiole VI shall be atrended: by providing a new section, numbered Section

14, which shall read.as follows:

For the frst twelve (12) months of a fulltime officer's
employment, the Township shall determine all schedules,
shifis and. assipninents of that officer at its discretion,
ayant
%e

_ except that split ity shall. not be permitted. This
provision. is-subject to the:temns-of Article Vil, Section 7,

 and-shall not-be applied for the purpose of disciplining: ‘any
officer.

' 9, Other Provisions

10.

All “other provisions of the 213-201 Toalective bargaining agreement shall
remain: in effect.

Integrated Avvard.

‘The ‘Tovaiship shall cause a@ neg oollective betgaining agreement to be
prepared: and printed, whith will accurately reflect the mudiffoatlons made by
‘this Award on the-prior collective: bargaining agreement between these partics.
‘The printed, contact shall contain a table of contents that indicates the page on.
which the starhof each artlole ofthe vontract can be found,

The Township shall distribute this: veins to’ the: Assovlation within ninety (90)
days of the exeontion. of this, Award, In the event the parties are unable to
agree: on any specific provision: of the ealfective bargaining agreement tobe
drafted 4a conformance with thiy Award, any dispute between the parties shall
be resolved by this Board of Arbitrators, and the Board shall retain jurisdiction
until such’ time as both partiss, have ratified and. exconted. a stew: collective
bargaining. agreeinent that: incorporates: the fermsand conditions of this Award,

Itis the specific fntent of tie Board that no ight o benefit of either party shall

“be added or dimsinisl by: the:mere printing of the: new. collective. bargaining

agreement

i
Ie is undetstond that fle signanae of cack drbiteator, whetherin conourretice or
in dissent, attests to. the fhet that-at least azpajority-of the panel-has concurred
an each issue: contained in the foregoing Award,

      

 

 
 

Biye Cmpbet r eaGuite
iitator for: Shaler Police

 

Bran Ton Gabriel Ea ou —
Arbitrator for Shaler Township
Bmployess

Conon (in. : Concur: W

. see ubkAched Rindcene
Dissent? (5 vin. Rare Didsenting” opanton . Dissent: y.

 

Date:

 

 

 

 
 

For the. following. yeasons, 1 aiust dissent {6 Paragraph 7, Paragraph 8-and Paragraplo 9 of
the Act 111 Tnferest.Arbitvation Award,.

The: Township is i Commiunilty- of Aging tale payers of modest: sriewn, tassiy of whom are
living. on fixed iacdme. The Award dase nothing to provide needed relief with respect to the
heavy pension aud-post-tetirement: health: eare: legany costs that the Township's residents are
forced to shoulder, As aresult, Trust dissent Paragraph:9 of the Awand, which provides-(hat the
terms of the 2013-2017 Collective Bargainitig Agreement not otherwise addressed | in the Award
shall reniain in effect, resulting in. an'Award that fails to address these orltical tssues.

In this case the Township: made a compelling case for relief with respect fo post-.
retirement healthcare aod pension cdsts. The Township suffered a 15.1%: decline in population
between 1980 and 2016 at 4 tine when the state of Pefihgylvania’s. population grew by 7.7%.
The ‘Township! §.case for relief i8-further supported: by the: fact that 20.9%. of ite kesidetits, more
than. 1 in 5, are 68 years old or older. In Fennsylvania, which is the fourth: oldest state in the
nation in terms: of percentage of older adults,. only. 16.7% of: the population is age 65 or older.
Likewise, the Townshlp’s median age of 465 years gid is nearly slx:-years older than
Pennsylvania’ ‘S median age of 40,6 of Allegheny Contity’s median, age of 40.8, Although the
Townstiip i is the seventh most populows eotimunity in Allegheny County; its- median howsehold
income of $68,054 and its median honsing value of $153,900 both rank 41"in the County. Thus,
not only is the population of Shafer Township signiffcantly: older than that of both Pennsylvania
aga whole-and the rest-of Allegheny County, Its residents are living on modest incomes in homes
af modest value-in a Towrihip with a much smaller vornmerctal tax base than, many: of its North
Hills neighbors. At the same time, the Township's minimum munielpal obligation for tts Police
Perisioh Plan ballooned from $76,189 i1'2017 to 3189,042 in 2018, This 148.1% increase in the
Township's pension ‘obligation. provided a compelling. basis: for gtinting the Township with
pension relief with respect to its proposal to oliminate:snst of living pension adjustments for new
hires, a charge that would have reduced persion: casts, without having a negative impact on, ‘any
citront employses:

 

 

Converting the Police Pension Plan's unusually high disability pension benefit to .a
normal retirerient: bertefit at the time: and. age of superaniuatlor: would have also provided.
needed velief.. It would. have done so-by. eliminating an illogieal disparity between the disability
pension benefit and the normal retirement benefit that provides-a. perverse financial incentive for
officers to: seek. to” separate from-enployment under conditions that would give rise to a more
costly disability pension tather than the: ‘legs tacrative normal pension: benefit.

‘The Towtiship’s postsretirement healtheare proposal would avt have affected any current
retirees but would have eliminated posteétirement: healthoare for spouses: of future retirees.
Posteretirement: healtheate coverage for spouses has already been eliminated for all other
Township employees, Althougti adroieedly 4 dy is more commonto see.postretirement healthcare
benefits curtailed for new hires, in thiy case a change fot-curtent employees who have pat yet |
retired was justified ‘by the. factors discussed ghove. and. the. fact that the Township’s-cost of
coverage “for retirees ig dlready approaching: the levels that will tigger the 40% Cadillac Tax

{Bos h=005e45172 }
exoise tax itor than thee years befbte lis 2022 implementation date. ‘Reqitting retirees who
" -bave access to other healthcare coverage through another eniployer or thelr spouse’s employer is

another change that would have provided significant telief to the Towriship that: the panel failed
to grant / ‘ : Do

I tiust also dissent to Paragraph 7, ‘which provides: the officers with significant new
benefit in permitting themi.to move outside of the Township so long as thay reside within-ten air
miles of the municipal building, Elimination: of the-résidénoy requirement-in this case is ‘simply
‘not supported by the evidence aor is it-offiet by any. meaningful concessions imposed on: the
Union. .

Finally, [must dissent-tp Paragraph. 8) The Township provided: extensive testimony: at the
hearing from the Chief of Police xeparding the Township's need for tellef with respect to
scheduling. Although the-panel'did provide Sonie-rellef by providing that duriag the fitst twelve
months of a full-tinie officer's, employment the Towriship shall have the ability to determine all
schedules, shifts and assignitients at its discretion, this: limited relief did. notgo-far enough, The
evidence in this case justified implementing this change for a longer period of time than just an

officer's. first twelve months of employment, .

For all of the foregoing reasons, C must disgent to- Paragraph 7,. Paragraph 8 and
Paragraph 9 of the Award:, SO -

- Respentfully submitted, —

     

Brian P. Gabriel, Esq. .
On Bebalf of Shaler Township.

{DeeNo-00849172}

 
A. Bryan Campbell

310 Grant Street, Suite 1700

Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15219
412-576-9946

 

October 15, 2018

Poieae cain MAE patented tes ets FEV twee bla

Steve Belack
1510 Holly Circle
Glenshaw, PA 15116

Re: __ Shaler Township Award

Dear Mr. Belack:

4

Pursuant to our telephone conversation, enclosed is the Award of the Board of Arbitrators
Regarding the January 1, 2018 ~ December 3 1, 2022 Collective Bargaining Agreement. Should
you have any questions regarding the enclosed document, please do not hesitate to contact Mr.
Campbell.

Sincerely yours,

Cee CC “Huon Sas

“Theresa Matiasic: “~~
Administrative Assistant

/tmm

 

{c1012614.1) |

 
RICHARD W, DISSEN

ATTORNEY — ARBITRATOR
dissesq@aol.com

P.O Box 326
Ingomar, Pennsylvania 15127

Phone/FAX (412) 345-8118
(412) 913-2656 (mobile)

November 12, 2018

Bryan Campbell, Esquire Richard Miller, Esquire

330 Grant Street, Suite 2620 Campbell Durrant Beatty

Pittsburgh PA 15219 Palumbo & Miller

bryancmpbl@yahoo.com 535 Smithfield Street, Ste 700
Pittsburgh, PA 15222-2302
RMiller@cdblaw.com

Via Electronic Mail

Re; Case Number: AAA 01-17-006-4388
Shaler Township and Shaler Township Pelice
Act 111 Interest Arbitration

Gentlemen:

This communication follows up our discussion on Friday, November 9, 2018, and
_ officially responds to your request for clarification of the same date. Specifically,
the parties have requested clarification on constructing the wage chart in Section 1 of
Article III of the collective bargaining agreement in order to comply with item no. 2
of the final Act 111 Interest Arbitration Award.

The intent of the Award was twofold, first it was intended to give every current
member of the bargaining unit, regardless of the years of service, the percentage
increases outlined in item No. 2 of the Award.

In addition, the Award was intended to maintain the ascending order of percentages
set forth in Section 2 of Article IM of the collective bargaining agreement
prospectively, and thus applicable to anyone hired after the date of the Award. To
best accommodate this intent, I would instruct the parties to develop two wage
charts. The first chart would apply the percentages set forth in item No. 2 of the

 
 

for

 

Shaler Award Clarification page 2
November 12, 2018

Award to the existing chart in the collective bargaining agreement, This chart will
not be incorporated in to the contract but will be used to apply the Award to officers
hired prior to the date of the Award for the length of the new collective bargaining
agreement. ‘The second chart would increase the 6" year officer salary only by the
percentages set forth in item No. 2 of the Award and the 1* through 5% steps would
then reflect the ascending order of percentages set forth in Section 2 of Article IN of
the collective bargaining agreement. Because this second chart will impact new
hires and apply prospectively for this contract and future contracts, I would instruct
the parties to incorporate the second chart into the collective bargaining agreement as
part of the integration process.

I trust this communication adequately and-conclusively-respends—to-the- parties’
request for clarification, howéver, if you have any other questions or concerns, please
do not hesitate to contact me. *

Thank you both.

Yours truly,

Richard W. Dissen

 

 

 
Richard W. Dissen

Attomey — Arbitrator
dissesq@aol.com

P.O Box 326
Ingomar, Pennsylvania 15127

2661 Commons Boulevard
Beavercreek, OH 45431

Phone/FAX (412) 345-8118
(412) 913-2656 (mobile)

February 18, 2019
Bryan Campbell, Esquire Richard Miller, Esquire
330 Grant Street, Suite 2620 Campbell Durrant Beatty
Pittsburgh PA 15219 Palumbo & Miller
bryancmpbl@yahoo.com 535 Smithfield Street, Ste 700
Pittsburgh, PA 15222-2302
RMiller@cdblaw.com

Via Electronic Mail Only

Re: Case Number: AAA 01-17-006-4388
Shaler Township and Shaler Township Police
Act 111 Interest Arbitration

Gentlemen:

This communication follows up our Executive Session, Friday, February 8, 2019, and
officially responds to your request for determinations regarding contract integration issues
pursuant to the jurisdiction retained in Section 10 of the Interest Arbitration Award. I will
address the issues raised in our Executive Session seriatim.

Initially, under Article 1, Section 2, the position of “Deputy Chief” shall be added as an
excluded position.

Second, consistent with my prior clarification dated November 12, 2018, the wage chart
to be incorporated into Article IN, Section 1 of the collective bargaining agreement will increase
the six (6) year officer salary only by the percentage set forth in item No. 2 of the Award and the
first through fifth steps will reflect the ascending order of percentages set forth in Section 2 of

 
Article IH of the collective bargaining agreement. Nevertheless, the additional wage chart which
applies the percentage set forth in item No. 2 of the Award to the existing chart in the collective
bargaining agreement, which will be used to apply the Award to officers hired prior to the date of
the Award for the length of the new collective bargaining agreement, will be attached to the next
collective bargaining agreement as an exhibit. That attachment will then be removed as obsolete
following expiration of the collective bargaining agreement.

Third, a new Section 14 shall be incorporated into Article VI of the collective bargaining
agreement which incorporates item No. 8 fromthe Award. It is clear that a majority of this panel
concurred in the adoption of item number 8 from the Interest Arbitration Award. While the
Union dissented to item No. 8, the neutral arbitrator and the partial arbitrator for the Township
concurred in its adoption. While the Township’s partial arbitrator dissented to the absence of
other relief requested by the Township, it is unequivocal that a majority of this panel concurred
in the adoption of the language set forth in item No. 8 of the Award.

Fourth, Item No. 4 of the Award modified Article X, Section 5 of the collective
bargaining agreement by reducing the maximum number of sick leave days that may be
accumulated from year to year to ninety (90) days for individuals hired on or after January 1,
2019. The Award, however, did not modify Article X, Section 6 to provide for the buyback for
unused sick leave days for such employees. As a result, no additional change shall be
incorporated. It is worth noting that no officer hired on or after January 1, 2019 would
accumulate more than sixty-four (64) days of sick leave during the term of this Award. As a
result, a request of this benefit may be viewed as premature and the parties are certainly free to
discuss the pros and cons of such a benefit in future contract negotiations.

Fifth, under Article XXII, Disability Benefits, a new paragraph should be added to the
end of the Article incorporating the language from item No. 6 of the Award. For integration
purposes, however, the last sentence of the provision should be clarified to indicate that reference
to the “Award” is the 2018 Act 111 Interest Arbitration Award. Accordingly, the last sentence
should read as follows “This 2018 Act LE1 Interest Arbitration Award does not provide for offsets
or for termination of benefits other than as set forth in the language of that current policy.”

Finally, the contract should have Attachment A updated to reflect the current healthcare
information and employee contribution information reflecting current figures.

To ensure an accurate understanding of the resolution of these integration issues, and to
avoid any further delay, attached to this communication is a redline copy of the integrated
agreement consistent with the Award, as clarified, and this communication.

I trust this communication and the attachment adequately and conclusively respond to the
parties’ integration issues; however, if you should have any other questions or concerns, please
do not hesitate to contact me, Thank you both.

Yours truly,

/sf RWD
Richard W. Dissen

RWD/he

 
C ID B CAMPBELL DURRANT BEATTY 535 Smithfield Street, Suite 700
PAM FALOMBO 6 MIL LER, PC. un Pittsburgh, PA 15222

Public Sector, Labor and Employment Law

 

Richard D, Miller
Attorney at Law

Direct Dial: (412) 395-1266
rmiller@cdblaw.com

IN REFERENCE TO; SHALER-64 25

February 21, 2019

Timothy J. Rogers, Manager
Shaler Township

300 Wetzel Road

Glenshaw, PA 15116-2288

RE: Act 111 Interest Arbitration between Township of Shaler
and Shaler Township Police

Dear Tim:

Enclosed please find two (2) original Collective Bargaining Agreements in final form for

execution by the parties. As I stated in my email to you, the Officers may keep an ex ‘iginal
and you may keep the other executed original. In addition, please send me a fully executed copy
formy files N

Very truly.

    

 

  

~ Richard Miller

RDM:seb

Enclosures
535 Smithfield Street, Suite 700 One Belmont Avenue, Suite 605
Pittsburgh, PA 15222 Bala Cynwyd, PA 19004
412-395-1280 610-227-2591

www.cdblaw.com
{DocNo=00610816.1 }
