FOR THE YEARS OF 2021THROUGH 2022
COLLECTIVE

BARGAINING AGREEMENT

BE1WEEN HARRISON TOWNSHIP

AND
GENERAL TEAMSIERS, a-IAUFFEURSAND HELPERS LOCAL
UNION NO. 249a/w INIERNATIONALBROTHERHOOD
OF
TEAMSTERS

(DocN0"'00765019.4}

TABLE OF CONTENTS

ARTICLE I

Recognition, Maintenance of Membership & Fair Share .............. 2-3

ARTICLE II

Township Rights ..................................................................................... 3-4

ARTICLE Ill

Rights of Members of the Police Department.. ......................................... 4

ARTICLEN

Bargaining Unit .......................................................................................... 4

ARTICLEV

Wages ..............................................................................................

ARTICLE VI

Healthcare Insurance........................................................................... 5 - 7

ARTICLE VII

Vacations .........................................................................................

ARTICLE VIII

Sick Leave ..........................................................................................

8

ARTICLE IX

Holidays .............................................................................................

8

ARTICLEX

Overtime and Hours of Work...............................................................

9

ARTICLEXI

Court Appearances ..........................................................................................
9

ARTICLEXII

Shift Differential ..........................................................................................
10

ARTICLE XIII

Clothing and Equipment Allowance....................................................... 10

ARTICLE XIV

Funeral Leave...................................................................................

ARTICLE XV

Bargaining Unit Work ........................................................................ 10-11

ARTICLEXVI

Other Working Conditions ..................................................................... 11

ARTICLE XVII

Liability Insurance .................................................................................... 11

ARTICLE XVIII

Past Practice .. .. .. ... .. .. ... . .. .. .. ... .. .. .. . .. ... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ... .. ... .. .. .. .. .. .. . .. .. ... .. . 11

ARTICLEXIX

Continuation of Rights ............................................................................. 11

ARTICLEXX

Retirement .. .. . .. .. .. .. .. ... ... .. .. .... . ... .. .. .. .. .. .. ... .. .. .. .. .. .. .. ... .. .. . .. .. .. . .. . .. . 11-12

ARTICLEXXI

Grievance Procedure.......................................................................... 12-13

ARTICLE XXII

Disability Absence Allowance .......................................................... 13-15

ARTICLE XXIII

Police Merger Clause.......................................................................

ARTICLE XXIV

Seniority.............................................................................................. 15-16

ARTICLEXXV

Residency .........................................................................................

16

ARTICLE XXVI

Duration ............................................................................................

16

(DocN0"'007650l9.4)

4-5

7-8

10

15

ARTICLE I - RECOGNITION, MAINTENANCE OF MEMBERSHIP

& FAIR

SHARE

Section 1 - Recognition:
The Township hereby recognizes General Teamsters, Chauffeurs, and Helpers Local
Union 249 a/w International Brotherhood of Teamsters (hereinafter the "Union") as the sole
and exclusive collective bargaining agent for the bargaining unit of the Township's Police
Officers as certified in PLRB Case No. PF-R-14-43-W.
Section 2 - Maintenance of Membership:
Each police officer who is a member of the Union on the effective date of this
Agreement and each police officer who, thereafter, becomes a member of the Union during
the term of this Agreement, shall maintain his/her membership in the Union for the duration
of this Agreement in conformance with the applicable state law, with the proviso that any
police officer may resign his/her membership from the Union during the period of fifteen (15)
days prior to the expiration of this Agreement or as otherwise permitted by applicable law.
The payment of uniform periodic dues and assessment while a member of the Union shall be
a requisite condition of employment for all police officers, except as modified by the fair
share provisions of the Agreement.
Section 3 - Deductions:
A.
The Employer shall deduct the regular dues, fees, and assessments of the Union
from the wages of any bargaining unit employee for whom the Union has submitted a written
authorization to the Employer. Consistent with federal, state and local law, the Employer
shall honor and adhere to the specific provisions of any such authorization for the deduction
of regular dues, fees, and assessments regarding the duration, renewal, procedure for
revocation, and all other provisions agreed to by the employee as stated in the authorization,
irrespective of the employee's membership in the Union.
B.
The Union agrees that in any legal action brought against the Township for
actions it is requested to perform in this regard the Union will defend, indemnify and hold
the Township harmless for any monetary damages the Township may be liable for as a
consequence of its compliance with this Article, except that it is expressly understood this
save harmless provision will not apply to any legal action which may arise as a result of the
Township's failure to properly perform its obligations under this Article.

Section 4 - Dues Deductions:
A. The Township agrees to deduct from the pay of all employees covered by this
Agreement the dues, initiation fees and/or uniform assessments for the Union,
whichever is applicable, on a monthly basis with all such deductions to be made
prior to the end of the month for which the deduction is credited. Union dues
deductions shall be made from vacation checks when employees are on vacation
during the week in which such union dues deductions are made. When an employee,
who is on check-off, is not on the payroll during the week in which the deduction is
made, or who has no earning or insufficient earnings during the week, or is on a
leave of absence, the employee must make arrangements with the Union to pay such
dues in advance. Dues shall be deducted during the first week of the month and
remitted to the Union prior to the end of the same month.
{DocNo-00765019.4

J

2

B. The Union shall certify to the Township in writing each month a list of its members
working for the Township who have furnished to the Township the required
authorization, together with an itemized statement of the dues, initiation fees (full or
installment), or uniform assessment owed and to be deducted for such month from the
pay of such member, and the Township shall deduct such amount from the first pay
check following receipt of statement of certification of the member and remit such to
the Union in one lump sum. It is further agreed that the Township shall add to the list
supplied by the Union the names of all new employees hired since the last list was
submitted and delete the names of employees who are no longer employed in the
bargaining unit.
C. The Township shall be held harmless against any and all claims, demands, suits or
other forms of liability that shall arise out of or by reason of action taken or not taken
by the Township in reliance on the above-mentioned authorization or deduction of
fees, dues charges, expenses, assessments, etc. from wages or from compliance with
the provisions of this Article.

ARTICLE II - TOWNSHIP RIGHTS
Section 1:
Except to the extent expressly abridged by a specific provision of this
Agreement or express provisions of the "First Class Township Code," the Township reserves and
retains the sole and exclusive right to operate the Police Department and its regular Police force,
as such rights existed prior to the execution of this or any other previous agreement with the
Union or the Police Committee. It is understood and agreed that all management rights
repose in the Township, and such rights must be exercised consistently with the other
provisions of this agreement. These rights include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. The right to direct employees of the Department;
B. The right to hire, promote, transfer, assign and retain employees in a position with
the Department, and to suspend, demote, discharge or take other disciplinary action
against employees, except, as limited by applicable laws and Civil Service
regulations and to set standards with respect to these rights;
C. The right to relieve employees from duties in conformance with the Civil Service
provisions of the First Class Township Code.
D. The right to maintain efficiency of the Department and to set standards for the safety of the
public;
E. The right to determine the methods, means and number of personnel by which the
Department is to operate, subject to the provisions of the First Class Township Code;
F. The right to take whatever action may be necessary to carry out the mission of the
Department in situations of emergency;
G. The right to establish the functions and programs of the Department;
H. The right to utilize new technologies;
I.

The right to determine the organizational structure of the Department;

J. All such other areas of inherent managerial policy that are not inconsistent with the First
(DocNo-00765019.4}

3

Class Township Code.
Section 2- Discipline and Discharge:
No suspension, demotion or discharge will occur without just cause. The Union and/or the
Police Officer cannot pursue a matter simultaneously through Civil Service and the grievance
procedure. The Police Officer must elect at the outset which of these two appeal procedures
the Police Officer will pursue, and the Police Officer's election shall become the exclusive
procedure for use in resolving the dispute. The Union and the Police Officer may grieve
suspensions, demotions and discharges. Written warnings, oral warnings, reprimands and
other forms of disciplinary action other than suspensions, demotions and discharges may not
be grieved.

ARTICLE III - RIGHTS

OF MEMBERS

OF THE POLICE

DEPARTMENT

~ 1: The Township shall take due caution and care to protect the rights of individual
Officers in any administrative proceedings that might result in criminal charges being filed against
an individual Officer. The Township shall give the Officer his Constitutional rights before any
statement is taken and shall give the Officer the right to have legal counsel before making any
statement which is an addition to his normal Police report.

ARTICLE IV - BARGAINING UNIT
Police Officer, as defined for purposes of this agreement, shall include all
regularly certified full-time Police Officers, excluding the Chiefof Police, regardless of rank.
~ 1:A

ARTICLE V-WAGES

Section1: The following are the salary scales to be paid by the Township to the members of
the Police Department:
Effective January 1, 2021 each Officer shall receive a base wage/salary scale
increase of 2.5%.
Effective January 1, 2022 each Officer shall receive a base wage/salary
scale increase of 2.5%.
Annual (2080 hours)
Sergeant .... ............ ..... ........ ......... ............ .......... $86,541.14

$41.61

Patrolman ..........................................................

$40.45

$84,129.31

Annual(2080hours)

Hourly

Sergeant .............................................................

$88,704.67

$42.65

Patrolman ..........................................................

$86,232.54

$41.46

{DocNo-00765019.4)

4

New hires shall be paid in accordance with the following schedule:
First 12 months .....................................................

70% of scale

Second 12 months ................................................

75% of scale

Third 12 months .......................................

80% of scale

Fourth 12 months .................................................

85% of scale

Fifth 12 months .....................................................

90% of scale

At the conclusion of sixty (60) months of full-time service, Officers merge into One
Hundred percent (100%) of the scale existing at that time.
Section 2: The Township shall pay to the members of the Police Department a longevity pay,
subject to the following conditions:

A

To be entitled to a longevity pay, a Police Officer must have completed a
minimum of five (5) years of consecutive service.

B.

The first payment will be in the amount of Six Dollars ($6.00) per month
and for each successive consecutive year of service, the Police Officer shall
receive an additional Six Dollars ($6.00) per month, up to a maximum
of One Hundred Twenty-Five Dollars ($125.00).

Section 3 - Officer in Charge Pay:
When a Sergeantis off from regularcrew assignment,the Officerin Chargeof the crew will receivea per
hour swplus equalto the differenceof the prevailing hourlyrate betweenthe rankof Sergeantand
Patrolman(fulltenuredrate)for the hours in which that officeris the rankingseniorofficerof the shift.

ARTICLE VI - HEALTHCARE INSURANCE
Section 1: The Township shall continue to provide for each Police Officer and his/her
immediate family healthcare insurance coverage.
A.
Effective January 1, 2018 Officers' contribution toward the premium cost for their
health insurance coverage shall increase from $1,000 to $1,200 per year. In addition, Officers
will also pay 25% of any cumulative increase in premium costs for health insurance, vision
and dental coverage over base year 2015. However, in no event shall Officers pay more than
the maximum amount deemed affordable under applicable Affordable Care Act provisions
and regulations in effect at the time of the contribution.
B.
The Township shall have the right to change existing medical, surgical and
hospitalization insurance to a plan that is comparable to the coverage which is presently
being provided. Comparable in this context does not mean exactly the same. The
employees, however, retain the right to grieve the Township's determination that the plan is
comparable. If the Union does not agree that a plan selected by the Township is comparable,
it will so state, in writing, to the Township within fourteen ( 14) calendar days of the plan
being provided to the Union by the Township, or such longer period as mutually agreed to
{DocNo-00765019.4}

5

by the parties in writing. In that event, the Township may not unilaterally implement the
proposed new plan, however, it may immediately process the dispute before a neutral
arbitrator selected pursuant to the arbitration step of the grievance procedure. The decision
of the arbitrator on the issue of comparability shall be issued within forty-five (45) calendar
days of the Union's written notice contesting that the plan selected by the Township is
comparable. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding and will determine if
the Township is authorized to implement the new plan.
If the Township receives notice or information indicating that its health care plan costs
will subject the plan to the Affordable Care Act's "Cadillac Tax" excise tax, the Township
will give the Union written notice of that fact and the parties will immediately meet to
discuss changes in the plan design, plan and/or plan carrier in order to avoid the imposition
of the tax. Ifno agreement is reached within fourteen (14) days of the Township's written
notice to the Union regarding this issue, then the parties will proceed to an expedited
arbitration proceeding with an arbitrator selected pursuant to the terms of the Collective
Bargaining Agreement's grievance and arbitration procedure. The primary purpose for that
expedited arbitration proceeding will be for the arbitrator to modify the plan, plan design
and/or plan carrier in order to eliminate the exposure to the Cadillac Tax. The arbitrator's
award may, however, also address the allocation of the payment of any deductible increases
imposed the expedited award. The decision of the arbitrator on these issues shall be issued
within forty-five (45) calendar days of his or her appointment.
Any arbitration arising under this Section shall be arbitrated in accordance with
Article XXI, Section 1(C), except as modified herein.
C.
In addition to the foregoing insurance benefits, within thirty days (30) of the
execution of the Interest Arbitration Award the Township shall carry life insurance on
each Officer in the amount of Fifty-Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00), payable to such
beneficiary as shall be designated by the Police Officer. Officers retiring after December
31, 2016 shall not be eligible for retiree life insurance.
D.
For officers hired before January 26, 2016, the Employer shall pay four
hundred dollars ($400.00) per month for health care benefits upon normal retirement
(age/years of service) up and until eligible for Medicare or reaching the age of 65
years, whichever occurs first. If at any time an Officer or his spouse becomes eligible
to receive medical benefits from any other source (prior to Medicare), benefits
provided by the Township shall cease. Officers will be required to complete a
verification form provided by the Township twice a year certifying whether they are
eligible to receive this benefit. If the Officer or spouse should then lose said medical
benefits they would be reinstated by the Township as above. The four hundred dollar
($400) per month health care allowance for retiring Officers until Medicare eligibility
or age sixty-five (65) shall be eliminated for Officers hired on or after January 26,
2016, the date the 2016 Interest Arbitration Award was executed.

ARTICLE VII - VACATIONS
Section 1: Each member of the Police Department shall, as of his anniversary date of
employment with the Police Department, be entitled to vacation time off without loss of pay
under the following conditions:

(DocNo-00765019.4}

6

WORKWEEK
SERVICETIME

VACATION ALLOWANCE

1styear of employment

None

Beginningof 2nd year throughcompletionof 3 years

One Week

Beginningof 4th year throughcompletionof 7 years

Two Weeks

Beginningof 8th year throughcompletionof 11 years

Three Weeks

Beginningof 12thyear through completionof 16 years

Four Weeks

Beginningof 17thyear through completionof20 years

Five Weeks

Beginningof 21st year and thereafter

One additional day for
each year after 20
years of service and
capped at Six weeks
for employees hired
after January 1, 2000

Section2: In order for an employee to qualify for a vacation on his anniversary date of
employment, he must have worked and received earnings in at least twelve (12) out of the twentyfour (24) pay periods immediately preceding his anniversary date of employment. When
circumstances warrant disregarding periods of disability of an employee, full vacation benefits
may be paid.
Section 3: Vacations shall be taken by the employee before his next anniversarydate
of employment and may not be accumulated.
Section 4: Time off from duty on an authorized leave of absence shall not be considered as a
break in continuous service.
Section 5: Employeeswho resignshallforfeitany rightto vacationor vacationpay, but any employee
who shallresignafter givingto the Townshiptwo (2) weeks'writtennoticeprior to the effectivedate of
his resignationshallbe entitledto receivedvacationpay for any vacationthat he has vestedor
accumulated,but not taken.
Section 6: Employeeswho are dischargedshallforfeitany right to vacationor vacationpay, unlesssuch
dischargeis setasideby the Civil ServiceCommissionor the Courts.
Section 7: Except as provided for below, vacations may be taken at any time during the Officer's
anniversaryyear.It is understoodand agreed,however,that the Townshipretainsthe sole and exclusive
right to determine the maximum number of vacationsthat can be taken at any one time. Vacation
preferencewill be grantedon a seniority basis that is, based on years of continuous service, work
requirements permitting.Once a vacationrequesthas been approved,it may only be changedby mutual
agreementof the Chief of Police and the Officer,or in the case of an emergencyor civildisorder,by the
Chief of Police.
Section8: Each memberof the policedepartmentshallbe entitledto three(3) personaldays withpay
per applicabletwelvemonthcalendaryear. Saidpersonaldays will be grantedas in accordancewith

vacationprovisionsas to preferenceon a senioritybasis,work requirementsand schedulingpermitting
but must be taken withinthe calendaryear opposedto officer's anniversaryyear.
(DocNo-00765019.4}

7

ARTICLE VID - SICK LEA VE
Section 1: It is agreed that the present system providing for sick leave with salary continuance and
disability absence allowances shall as of January I, 2012 be amended to reflect clarification of the
total amount of time available for sick and disability leave in any twelve (12) month period as
separately charted for current employees and new employees hired after January 1, 2012.
Medical excuses are required for three (3) consecutive days of absence due to illness.
There shall be an assessment against sick leave for partial day absences of more than four (4)
hours.

ARTICLE IX - HOLIDAYS
Section 1: The following days shall be recognized as holidays:
New Year's Day

Veterans Day

Good Friday

Thanksgiving Day

Easter Sunday

Christmas Day

Memorial Day

Flag Day

Independence Day

Officers Birthday

Labor Day
Section2: Each member of the Department who is scheduled off on the day of a holiday but on
the active roster during any calendar week a holiday occurs within, shall be paid for the
holiday at his regular rate of pay, provided that he works his regularly scheduled work day
immediately preceding and immediately following the holiday involved, unless excused for
approved illness, vacation, or personal day.
Section 3: Any member of the Department who is on extended sick leave (inactive roster
for the entire calendar week the holiday occurs within) or on vacation over any holiday shall
be paid for those holidays in accordance with relevant holiday allowance.

ARTICLE X - OVERTIME AND HOURS OF WORK
Section 1: All Police Officers who work in excess of forty (40) hours per work week or in
excess of eight (8) hours per work day shall be paid at one and one-half (1- 1/2) times the
straight hourly rate. There shall be no duplication of payment for work in excess of forty (40)
hours in a workweek and in excess of eight (8) hours in a workday. A workweek shall consist
of seven (7) consecutive days beginning at 11 :01 p.m., Sunday. A workday is the twentyfour (24) hour period beginning with the time the Police Officer begins work.
Section 2: The normal schedule of work shall be five (5) days per week as scheduled by the
(DocNoa007650l9.4}

8

Chief. Each scheduled workday shall consist of eight (8) hours of which one-half (1/2) hour shall
be a paid lunch period.
Section 3: In addition to the above, the work schedule as is now followed shall continue to be
followed during the term of this agreement unless modified by mutual agreement.
Section 4: Time and one-half(l-1/2) shall be paid in addition to holiday pay for all hours
worked on one of the above holidays. Notwithstanding evidence that Officers were previously
paid for a period and at a rate in excess of what is clearly and unambiguously set forth in the
first sentence of this Section, any such practice is determined to be unenforceable and is
declared null and void.
Section 5: The distribution of overtime work for regular full-time Officers shall follow the
equalization principal. An Officer who is offered, or to whom the Township attempts to offer, and
who refuses overtime, or is unavailable, will be deemed to have received overtime for the purpose
of making an "equalization" calculation unless the specifically offered overtime date is the
identical date of an officer's pre-scheduled vacation day or sick leave.

ARTICLE XI- COURT APPEARANCES
Section1: If a Police Officer, during off-duty hours, is required to appear in Court in cases
which are job-related, the Township shall pay said Officer at his overtime hourly rate for actual
time at Court [plus two (2) hours travel time when travel is necessary to Pittsburgh or similar
distances], but not to be paid for less than a total of four (4) hours nor exceed eight (8) total hours
in any one (1) day.
Section2: If a Police Officer, during off-duty hours, is required to appear at a Magistrate hearing
in cases which are job-related, each Officer shall be guaranteed at a minimum two (2) hours' pay at
the overtime hourly rate. For any off-duty hours spent at a Magistrate hearing in excess of two (2)
hours, a Police Officer shall be paid the overtime hourly rate providing he or she provides the
Township with a certification of the actual time spent at the Magistrate Court on a form
provided for by the Township.
Section 3: Time attributed to Section 1 or Section 2 above shall not be calculated in determining
seniority overtime list.

ARTICLE XII-SHIFTDIFFERENTIAL
Section 1: Each Police Officer who works between the hours of3:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. shall be
paid a shift differential of Seventy Five Cents ($0.75) per hour for the hours worked.
Sroico.2:EachPolice Officer who works between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. shall
be paid a shift differential of Eighty Five Cents ($0.85) per hour for the hours worked.

ARTICLE XIII - CLOTHINGANDEQUIPMENT
ALWWANCE
Section1: Each Police Officer shall receive an annual clothing allowance of Seven Hundred
Dollars ($700.00). The employer may implement whatever voucher or replacement system it
deems appropriate. If the Officer's appearance is not deemed acceptable under said Rules and
( DocNo-007650 I 9.4 }

9

Regulations, by the Chief of Police, the Officer shall be sent home and directed to ensure that his
uniform and/or equipment is made acceptable under the requirements of the Rules and
Regulations. Any monies not used in an Officer's clothing account cannot be deducted from
next year's total. Any clothing allowance monies not used in a particular calendar year may be
carried over to the next year calendar year to the extent that, when added to the next year's
clothing allowance total the amount available as a clothing allowance does not exceed One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00). When utilized, the monies carried over shall be used for the
purchase of bulletproof vests. Every five (5) years the Township will provide up to $1,000.00 per
officer to replace one bulletproof vest per officer when it reaches its expiration date. Officers
shall turn in any bulletproof vests provided by the Township when they reach their expiration
date or when the officer leaves employment. Officers shall submit the expiration date for their
current bulletproof vest to the Chief of Police.
Section 2: Clothing allowance shall include, inter alia, all employer approved Police apparel
and currently utilized and sanctioned accessory equipment, including outerwear, shoes,
boots, rainwear, leather goods, handcuffs, OC Spray, ballistic and traffic vests, flashlight
and applicable batteries and traffic wands. The past practice of supplying ammunition shall be
continued for the term of this agreement.

ARTICLEXIV-FUNERAL

LEA VE

Section 1: Each Police Officer shall be entitled to three (3) working days off with full
pay which will include the day of the funeral for the death of a spouse, mother, father, brother,
sister, son, daughter and spouse's parents.

ARTICLE XV - BARGAINING UNIT WORK
Section 1:All customary Police work shall be first offered to the available regular
certified full-time Police Officers before any work assignment shall be offered to part-time
Police.
Section 2: The bargaining unit shall, on or before Thursday of each week, file with
the Office of the Chief of Police a list of names of bargaining unit members
available for overtime work or special assignments for the week commencing the
ensuing Sunday.
Section3: No non-bargaining unit member shall be assigned to pertinent work until the
work has been offered to those bargaining unit members on said list who have on said list
indicated their availability at the time of the respective work.
Section 4: This article shall not apply to special Police assigned to school crossings or church
duties.

ARTICLE XVI - OTHER WORKING CONDITIONS
Section 1: A minimum staffing of two officers must be on duty at all times. All full-time
personnel (including the Chief and Detective) shall be considered in the two-Officer per shift
rule; it shall not be a violation of the two Officer per shift rule if the Chief or Detective must
{DocNo-00765019.4}

10

leave the Township unexpectedly due to an urgent situation, but if their departure is extended,
all reasonable efforts must be made to secure a regular full-time Officer to complete the balance
of that shift.
ARTICLE XVII - LIABILITY

INSURANCE

Section 1: In addition to the present liability insurance coverage now carried by the
Township, the Township shall provide liability insurance for false arrest, false imprisonment and
malicious prosecution for each Police Officer with minimum coverage of Fifty Thousand
Dollars ($50,000.00) per incident.
ARTICLE XVIII - PAST PRACTICE
Section 1: The terms and conditions expressly set forth in this Agreement represent the full
and complete Agreement and commitment between the parties hereto, including salaries,
pensions and all fringe benefits. Any matters or subjects not herein covered, have been
satisfactorily addressed, compromised or waived by the parties for the life of this Agreement,
and no past practices or understandings existing prior to the effective date of this Agreement
are intended to survive unless specifically included in the terms herein.
ARTICLE XIX - CONTINUATION OF RIGHTS
Section 1: All members of the Harrison Township Police Department who are currently
employed and any party who shall be so employed in the future shall serve in the capacity of
a Police Officer of the Township under the full coverage of the Civil Service regulations
which are now in effect and shall enjoy any rights and privileges which that coverage
extends for the period of this and subsequent contracts, unless said members of the Police
Department should relinquish such rights and coverage by the unanimous vote of the
members. The Township shall make no changes in the present system under which the
Civil Service Commission operated during the life of this clause, unless said changes are in
accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which govern said
application of Civil Service procedures.
ARTICLE XX - RETIREMENT
Section 1: The Township Commissioners shall maintain a police pension
ordinance which shall continue the police pension plan configured as it was prior to
January 1, 2000 with the following modifications:

RETIREMENT
QUALIFICATIONS
BENEFIT
A. Not less than an aggregate of twenty-five (25) years in the Police force of the Township of
Harrison, and a minimum age of fifty-five (55) years, and further, that said Officer's pension
shall be determined on the basis of an Officer's final thirty-six (36) months of service.
B. A service increment benefit of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) per month for any
employee who retires, after December 31, 2011, with years of aggregate service equaling or
exceeding twenty six (26) as reflected in Act 89 of December 22, 2005 which amended
provisions of Act 600 pension plans.
C. Following an actuarial study, if the Police Pension Plan is found to be financially sound,
(DocNo-00765019.4}

11

the Police will no longer have to contribute 5% of salary to the Pension Plan. However, if
changes occur in the Plan which require same, the 5% contribution will be reinstated.
Section 2: As of the date the 2016 Interest Arbitration Award was executed the mandatory
retirement age for police officers shall be age sixty-five (65). Officers shall retire by the end
of the month in which they tum sixty-five (65), except that any Officer(s) hired in or before
2006 and continuously employed by the Township thereafter will be permitted to retire by
the end of the tenth month after they tum age sixty-five (65).
For any police officers who are forced to retire due to the mandatory retirement requirement
in 2015 or 2016 only, the Township shall pay the cost of a mutually acceptable Medicare
supplement for the retiree and his/her spouse for up to three years after the date of
retirement. This benefit shall not apply and/or coverage shall cease before the end of the
three year period if the officer becomes eligible for comparable coverage through other
employment, of either the officer or his spouse, or with the officer's death.
Section 3: For Officers hired after the date the 2016 Interest Arbitration Award was
executed pension benefits shall be based on, and contributions shall be taken from, base
salary only excluding any additional amounts such as overtime, shift differential and any
other form of additional compensation above base wages.
Section 4: From January 1, 2021 through April 30, 2022, officers with not less than an
aggregate of twenty-five (25) years in the Police force of the Township of Harrison and a
minimum age of fifty-five (55) years shall be eligible to elect to participate in a Deferred
Retirement Option Plan ("DROP") as set forth in Appendix A, provided that they must
begin their participation in the DROP no later than April 30, 2022. After April 30, 2022
the DROP program shall expire and shall no longer be available.
ARTICLE XXI - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

POLICY: It is the policy of the Township to encourage a harmonious and cooperative
relationship between its employees and to resolve employee grievances
in
accordance
with fair and orderly procedures.
DEFINITION: A grievance is a dispute concerning the interpretation, application or
alleged violation of a specific term or provision of this agreement.
Section1: An employee is entitled to select the committee or its accredited representative to
represent him during all steps of the grievance procedure, which is as follows:

A.
First Step Chief of Police. A grievance shall be filed within ten (10)
days from the date of the occurrence giving rise to the grievance. An employee with a grievance
shall discuss it with the Chief of Police who shall attempt to resolve the grievance to the
mutual satisfaction or the employee and Township within five (5) workdays of its
presentation. The Chief of Police shall report his decision to the employee in writing. If the
employee does not proceed with his grievance to the Second Step within the time limits
prescribed in the following subsection, and no extension of time is granted, the grievance shall
be considered to be satisfactorily resolved.

B.

Second Step-Public

Safety Committee of the Board of Commissioners.

{Do<No-00765019.4)

12

If the employee is not satisfied with the disposition of his grievance at the First Step, he may
submit a written appeal to the Public Safety Committee of the Board of Commissioners
within five (5) workdays after receiving a decision at the First Step or within not less than five
(5) workdays nor more than ten (10) workdays after the grievance was presented at the First
Step. The Public Safety Committee, within ten (10) workdays after receiving the appeal, shall
hold a hearing at which the employee may present his grievance. The Public Safety Committee,
within ten (10) workdays following the hearing, shall give the employee a written decision. If
the employee does not proceed with his grievance to the Third Step within the time limits
prescribed in the following subsection, and no extension of time is granted, the grievance shall be
considered to be satisfactorily resolved.
C.
Third Step - Arbitration.
If the Union is not satisfied with the disposition of the
Grievance at the Second Step, the Union may appeal to arbitration within five (5) workdays
after receiving the Township's decision at the Second Step or not less than twenty (20)
workdays or more than twenty-five (25) workdays after the Grievance was presented at the
Second Step. A request for arbitration may be initiated by the Union serving upon the
Township a notice in writing of an intent to proceed to arbitration. The Notice shall identify
the agreement provision in dispute, the issue(s) to be determined and the Police Officer or
Police Officers involved. Upon receipt of notice requesting arbitration, the parties shall
obtain a list of potential arbitrators from the American Arbitration Association (list-only
service).
1.

The arbitrator shall have no power or authority to add to, subtract
from or modify the provisions of this agreement in arriving at a
decision of the issue(s) presented and shall confine his decision solely to
the application and interpretation of this agreement. The decision or
award shall be final and binding.

2.

Each party shall bear the cost of preparing and presenting its own
case, and the costs and expenses of the neutral arbitrator shall be shared
equally by the parties.

Section 2: A grievance which affects a substantial number of employees may initially be
presented by the Union at Step Two of the Grievance Procedure. The Union shall designate
one (1) spokesman to act as representative for the group.
Section 3: A grievance may be withdrawn by the Union or the aggrieved employee at any time,
and the withdrawal of any grievance shall not be prejudicial to the positions taken by the parties as
they relate to that grievance or any future grievance.
Section 4: The time limits set forth in this Grievance Procedure shall, unless extended by mutual
written agreement of the Township and the Union, be binding and any grievance not timely
presented, or timely processed thereafter, shall not be considered a grievance under this agreement
and shall not be arbitrable.
ARTICLE XXII - DISABILITY ABSENCE ALLOWANCE
Scope
This policy governs absence from work as the result of personal disability caused by accident or
sickness.
Length
of Salary
Continuance
Compensation will be continued in accordance with the following table of limitations:
{Do<No-00765019.4}

13

Employees Hired before January 1, 2012
Period of continuous Service Time

Maximum Disability
Absence Allowance (workweeks)

5 years but less than 10 years ..................................................
Balance of pay period and 12 weeks
10 years but less than 15 years............................
Balance of pay period and 16 weeks
15 years but less than 20 years ............................

Balance of pay-period and 20 weeks

20 years and over .........................................

Balance of pay period and 26 weeks

.

Employees Hired after January 1, 2012
Period of continuous Service Time

Maximum Disability
Absence Allowance (workweeks)

0 to 8 weeks .....................................................................

Balance of pay period and Oweeks

8 weeks but less than 6 months ............................................ Balance of pay period and 2 weeks
6 months but less than 1 year ............................................... Balance of pay period and 3 weeks
1 year but less than 5 years .................................................... Balance of pay period and 5 weeks
5 years but less than 10 years .......................................................
Balance of pay period and 8 weeks
10 years but less than 15 years ............................... Balance of pay period and 12 weeks
15 years but less than 20 years ..................................... Balance of pay-period and 15 weeks
20 years and over ..............................................

Balance of pay period and 22 weeks

Police Officers are guaranteed that, when absent due to sickness or disability in a twelve
month period they will receive a total applicable to their tenure ofup to 26 weeks of either
the above-described disability absence allowances or insured weekly disability benefits,
payable through the Salary Insurance program, or a combination of the two.
Rules

governing

payment

of Disability

Allowance

A.
The period of payment for an employee's absence from work, exclusive
of vacations, due to an employee's absence from work as a result of one or more
personal disabilities in any twelve (12) month period will be in accordance with the
above table.

B.

A twelve ( 12) month period

shall commence

with the first day of

absence.
C.
If an employee has received his maximum
Allowance in a twelve (12) month period, any succeeding
not commence until that twelve month period of disability
employee has returned to work on the active roster and is
another disability.

Disability Absence
maximum period shall
has expired and the
afterward absent due to

D.

The pay period in which an employee is first absent will not be counted
for purposes of computing Disability Absence Allowance. In any subsequent
absences in defined twelve (12) month period, this provision will not apply.

E.
Disability Absence Allowance payments shall be reduced by the amount of
Workmen's Compensation payments that may be payable to an employee with respect to
the period of disability absence allowance.
(DocNo=00765019.4}

14

F.
Eligibility. To be eligible for payments under the provisions of this policy, an
employee absent for three or more consecutive days shall be required to substantiate the
disability or illness by submission of an excused absence certificate by a treating or
examining licensed physician which attests to the officer's time off from duty as well as
current fitness for duty ( essential capabilities regarding degrees of exertion that may be
required) to fulfill the duties of his/her regularly assigned position.

ARTICLE XXIII - POLICE MERGER CLAUSE
Section 1: If there is a merger of the police department with another municipality or
municipalities, and/or if this department were dissolved and/or abolished, and/or in the event
that such a merger is discontinued, the members of the Harrison Township Police Department
must be reinstated to the Township of Harrison Police Department on the basis of seniority
before any other person(s) can be employed in the Harrison Township Police Department. All
police officers who are reinstated shall be compensated in accordance with the terms and
conditions of employment that formerly existed before the Township entered into a merger. If
a merger is implemented by the Township, then said officers of the bargaining unit shall be
compensated at a rate which is not less than their current rate.

Section 2: Regionalization:
The Township may, during the term of this Agreement, choose to deliver police services by
joining a police department formed pursuant to the Inter-Governmental Cooperation Act or
by contracting with another community or communities for such services. In either case, the
Township cannot do this unless the Township provides the Union with at least three (3)
months' notice of an intent to do so and meets with the Union at reasonable times and places
to bargain over the impact of this decision. In the event that this impact bargaining does not
resolve the dispute(s) between the parties relating to the Township's decision, the dispute(s)
shall be resolved in binding interest arbitration conducted pursuant to Act 111 of 1968, except
that the calendar requirements of Act 111 of 1968 shall not apply and the list of arbitrators
provided by the American Arbitration Association shall number seven (7) instead of three (3).

ARTICLEXXIV- SENIORTIY
Section 1: For purposes of this Agreement seniority shall be defined as the length of
continuous service a Police Officer has with the Township from his/her most recent date of
hire. Seniority shall accrue during authorized leaves of absence, provided there has been no
break in service under Section 4 of this Article.
Section 2: Seniority for the purpose of vacation selection and furlough shall be determined
by the length of unbroken service within the bargaining unit.
Section 3 - Break in Service:
A Police Officer's seniority shall be broken for any of the following reasons:
o Voluntary termination of employment, including job abandonment;
o Absence from work for three (3) consecutive work days without notice to
{DocNo-00765019.4

J

15

the Township;
o Discharge for Just Cause;
o When recalled after layoff, upon his/her failure to report for work within a
period of forty-eight (48) hours after the Police Officer was sent notification
by certified mail to the Police Officer's last known address to return to work;
o Absence from work for any reason, including but not limited to absences due to
a layoff or physical disability, in excess of one (1) year; provided that this
subsection will not alter the Township's right to immediately terminate any
Police Officer who has reached maximum medical improvement and is unable
to perform the essential functions of the job with or without reasonable
accommodation, if such accommodation is required;
o Acceptance of other employment while on authorized leave of absence, including
sick leave, unless said other employment is authorized by the Township; or
o Transfer or promotion to a position outside the bargaining unit.
Section 4: When a Police Officer whose continuous service has been broken by any of the abovelisted reasons is again hired, s/he shall begin employment as a new employee within the
bargaining unit.

ARTICLE XXV - RESIDENCY
Section 1: Police Officers shall be permitted to reside within 15 air miles of the Township, provided
that they are able to get to the Township within 25 minutes by driving within the speed limit.

ARTICLE XXVI - DURATION
Section 1: The Agreement shall be effective as of the 1st day of January, 2021 and shall
remain in full force and effect until and including the 31st day of December, 2022. The
Agreement shall automatically renew from year to year thereafter, unless either party
notifies the other in writing pursuant to Act 111 that it desires to modify or terminate this
agreement.

(DocN0"00765019.4)

16

IN WITNESS W{EREOF, the parties he,eto have set thei, hands and seals this
of
[JI)If
2021.
TEAMSTERS LOCAL 249

TOWNSHIP OF HARRISON
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS

~#t/4L:lf
Kevin M. Schmitt, President

1eu-,,;1;
P1-twL_

Keith P. Frank, Vice President

~~
'

NY..JJki,
Committee

6~~
Brian Turack, Committee

{DocNo-00765019.4

J

17

z;/C,day

APPENDIX A

DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN PROPOSAL
The Township will implement a Deferred Retirement Option Program ("DROP") for
eligible officers under the following terms and conditions. Eligible officers must begin their
participation in the DROP between January 1, 2021 and April 30, 2022. After April 30, 2022,
the window to elect this DROP program shall expire and officers shall no longer be able to
elect to participate in the DROP.
DROP Eligibility and Requirements
1. An eligible participant of the DROP program will be an officer that: (a) has reached
Normal Retirement Age by attaining age 55 with 25 years of service; and (b) elects to
participate in the DROP program under all specified terms of the DROP program and
begins participating in the DROP no later than April 30, 2022.
2. The terms of participation require that the officer retire and begin the DROP period on
or after a date after the officer attains Normal Retirement Age (55/25).
3. The maximum period of DROP participation will be three (3) years.
account shall accrue interest of 0.0% to 4.5%.

The DROP

4. The DROP ordinance and administration will be in accordance with Act 44.

{DocNo-0016S019.4 )

18

DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN
Definitions

1.0

DROP - The Deferred Retirement Option Plan is created as an optional form of
benefit under the existing Township of Harrison Police Pension Plan available
to eligible members of the Plan to elect beginning on January 1, 2021 and ending
on April 30, 2022, provided that an officer electing the DROP must begin
participating in it no later than April 30, 2022.
DROP Account - A separate interest bearing account created to accumulate the
DROP pension benefit for a DROP participant.
Member - A full-time Township of Harrison police officer covered by the Plan.
Participant - A member who: (a) is eligible for normal retirement (attains age
55 with 25 years of service); and (b) has elected to participate in the DROP
program in accordance with all terms and conditions of the DROP program.
Plan - The Township of Harrison Police Pension Plan adopted pursuant to Act
600.
DROP Term - The maximum term of a DROP participation shall be three (3)
years.

1.1

DROP Provisions
(a)

Eligibility. Effective January 1, 2021 through April 30, 2022, members of the
Harrison Township Police Department who are eligible for a full superannuation
retirement benefit and have not retired prior to the implementation of the DROP
program, may enter into the DROP on the first day of any month following the
attainment of age fifty-five (55) and the completion of twenty-five (25) or more
years of credited police service with the Township of Harrison by the member
submitting the "Written Election" requirements described in subsection l.l(b).
Upon the effective date of a DROP election, the officer shall be deemed to be
retired.

(b)

Written Election. An eligible member of the Plan electing to participate in the
DROP program must complete and execute a "Drop Election Form" prepared
by the Township Secretary, Township Manager and/or the plan administrator,
which shall evidence the member's participation in the DROP program, and
document the participant's rights and obligations under the DROP. The form
must be signed by the member and the Chief Administrative Officer of the Plan
and submitted to the Township at least 30 days before the date on which the
member wishes the DROP election to be effective. The DROP Election Form
shall include: an irrevocable notice to the Township by the member that the
member shall terminate his or her employment with the Township Police
Department effective on a specific date ("resignation date") in which they

(DocNo-00765019.4}

19

terminate employment and no later than thirty-six (36) months from the
effective date of the DROP election.

In addition, all retirement documents required by the Township Police Pension
Plan Administrator must be filed and presented to the Township Board of
Commissioners for approval of retirement and the commencement of the
monthly pension benefit. Once the retirement application has been approved by
the Township Board of Commissioners, it shall become irrevocable.
After a Participant enters the DROP Program, contributions to the Plan by the
participant and the Township will cease.
Members are hereby advised to consult a tax advisor of their choice before
considering the DROP program as there may be serious tax implications and/or
consequences to participating in the DROP program.

(c)

Limitation on Pension Accrual. After the effective date of the DROP election,
the Participant shall no longer earn or accrue additional years of continuous
service for pension purposes.

(d)

Benefit Calculation. For all Plan purposes, continuous service of a Participant
shall remain as it existed on the effective date of commencement of participation
in the DROP program. Service thereafter shall not be recognized or used for
the calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the Plan. The
average monthly pay of the Participant for pension calculation purposes shall
remain as it existed on the effective date of commencement of participation in
the DROP program. Earnings or increases in earnings thereafter shall not be
recognized or used for the calculation or determination of any benefits payable
by the Plan.

(e)

Payments to DROP Account. The monthly retirement benefits that would have
been payable had the Participant elected to cease employment and receive a
normal retirement benefit shall, upon the member commencing participation in
the DROP program, be credited on the first day of each month into a separate
interest bearing account established by the Plan Administrator to track and
accumulate the participant's monthly pension benefits. This account shall be
designated the DROP Account.
Interest shall be compounded and credited monthly at the actual rate earned by
the DROP participant account that shall not be less than 0.0% nor more than
4.5%. The DROP account shall be an FDIC-insured bank account or other
investment that will not lose value. The interest rate on DROP accounts shall
be no less than 0%. The account shall be managed by the Plan Administrator
pursuant to the same fiduciary obligations and principles applicable to
management of municipal pension plans. All earnings credited to the DROP
account will be included in the final cash settlement to the extent permitted by
law.

(f)

Early Termination. A Participant may withdraw from the DROP program at
any time and effectuate a complete retirement from service. No penalty shall

{DocNo-00765019.4 )

20

be imposed for early termination of DROP participation.
However, the
Participant shall not be permitted to make any withdrawals from the DROP
Account until DROP participation has ended. Upon either early or regular
termination of DROP participation the DROP Participant shall be separated
from employment with the Township and the retirement Plan shall pay the
balance in the DROP Participant's DROP Account to the terminating Participant
as provided herein and the DROP Participant shall be ineligible to re-enroll in
the DROP thereafter even if the former DROP Participant is re-employed by the
Township.

(g)

Payout. Upon the termination date set forth in the DROP Election Form or on
such date as the participant withdraws or is terminated from the DROP program,
if earlier, the normal retirement benefits payable to the participant or the
participant's beneficiary, if applicable, shall be paid directly to the participant
or beneficiary and shall no longer be credited to the DROP Account. Except in
cases of early termination addressed in paragraph (f) above, within 45 days of
the maximum period allowed by applicable law following the actual termination
of a participant's employment with the Township Police Department, the
accumulated balance in the DROP Account shall be paid to the participant, his
or her survivor or beneficiary, (1) in a single lump-sum payment, subject to any
required federal tax withholding, or (2) as a direct rollover to an eligible
retirement plan or other qualified retirement account as permitted by law or
individual retirement annuity. If the participant, his or her survivor or
beneficiary, selects the rollover option, he or she must also submit the
appropriate paperwork from the IRA or other qualified retirement plan
custodian within the required election period.

(h)

Disability During DROP. If a participant becomes eligible for a disability
pension benefit and terminates employment, the monthly normal retirement
benefit to the DROP participant shall terminate.

(i)

Death. If a Participant dies before the DROP account balance is paid, the
patticipant's beneficiary under Act 600 shall have the same rights under
applicable law as the participant to withdraw the DROP Account balance. The
monthly benefit credited to the participant's DROP Account during the month
of the participant's death shall be the final monthly benefit for DROP
participation.

1.3

Effective Date.
The effective date of the DROP program is January 1, 2021. The ability to elect
this benefit shall expire April 30, 2022.

1.4

Severability.
The provisions of the DROP Plan shall be severable, and if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional or illegal, the validity of any of the remaining
provisions of the Plan shall not be affected thereby. It is hereby expressly
declared as the intent of the Township and Union that the DROP Plan has been
accepted as if such unconstitutional or illegal provision had not been included

[DocN0"'00765019.4)

21

herein.
1.5

Eligibility for Statutory Benefits.

A DROP Participant shall be eligible for all pre-retirement benefits for
employees otherwise provided by law including, but not limited to, the
following:
a. The Workers' Compensation Act (the Act of June 2, 1915 (P.L.
736, No. 338)).
b. The Enforcement Officer Disability Benefits Law (the Act of June
28, 1935 (P.L. 477, No. 193)).
c. The Unemployment Compensation Law (the Act of December 5,
1936 (2nd Sp. Sess., 1937 P.L. 28979 No. 11)).
d. The Emergency and Law Enforcement Personnel Death Benefits
Act (the Act ofJune 24, 1976 (P.L. 424, No. 101)).
e. The Public Safety Officers' Benefit Act of 1976 (Public Law 94430, 42 U.S.C.  90 Stat. 1347).

1.6

Contract/Pension Plan Benefits.

A DROP Participant shall be entitled to benefits set forth in the applicable
collective bargaining agreement.

1.7

Legislation/Amendment of the Plan.

At all times, the DROP shall be administered in accordance with Act 205 of
1956, as amended through Act 44 of2009 (53 P.S.  895.1001 -  895.1131).

In the event of amendment of legislation governing DROPs in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, this DROP shall be amended to comply with
any new mandatory provisions set forth in such legislation. The application of
any amendments to police officers actively employed as of the effective date of
any such legislation shall be governed by and consistent with constitutional
principles applicable to the pension and retirement benefits.
The DROP shall be deemed to be automatically amended to the extent necessary
to remain in compliance with and/or sever any inconsistency with any change
of statutory or applicable common law. The Township may amend the terms of
the DROP ordinance without negotiation, limited, however, to the extent
necessary to remain in compliance with any changes in controlling law.

(DocNo-00765019.4)

22

