AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE BOROUGH OF DORMONT AND THE DORMONT POLICE ASSOCIATION 
JANUARY 1, 2018-DECEMBER 31, 2021 
I. TERM OF AGREEMENT 
The term ofthis Agreement shall be four (4) years, beginning January 1, 2018 through December 31, 2021. 
II. 
COMPENSATION 

A. 
WAGES 


Wages for Officers shall be as follows: FROM JA~'1JARY 1, 2018 THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2018 
$54.528.69 : S26.22 hourly i
Start 
62.5% 
Act 120 
65% 
S56,709.84 1 S27.26 hourly 
One Year Service '67.5% 
$58.890.98 : S28.31 hourly 
Two Years Service 

70% ! S61,072.13 l $29.36 hourly 
Three Years Service 
72.5% , $63,253.28 I S30.41 hourly 
Four Years Service 

75% i $65.434.43 ! S3l.46 hourly 
Five Years Service 
80% 
$69,796.72 i $33.56 hourly 
Six Years Service 
87.5% I $76,340.16 i $36.70 hourly . 
Pre-2018 Less than Five Years Service 
90% ; $78.529.41 l S37.75 hourly 
l 
I Seven Years Service 
95% : $82,883.61 : $39.85 hourly 
Eii!ht Years Service 
100% l $87,254.90 l $41.95 hourly 
Sergeant 
110% 

$95,970.49 I $46.14 hourly 
FROM JANUARY 1, 2019 THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2019 
Start  62.5%  t I  $56.518.99  $27 .17 hourly  
Act 120  65%  I  $58,779.75  $28.26 hourly  
One Year Service  67.5%  $61.040.51  $29.35 hourly  
Two Years Service  70%  $63.301.27  $30.43 hourly  
Three Years Service  72.5%  $65,562.03  I  $31.52 hourly  :  
;  Four Years Service  75%  $67,822.79  $32.61 hourly  ! '  
I i  Five Years Service  80%  S72,344.30  $34.78 hourly  
i  Six Years Service Seven Years Service  87.5% 95%  ! I  $79,126.58 $85,908.86  $38.04 hourly $41.30 hourly  '  
Eii!htYears Service  100%  I  $90,430.38  $43.48 hourly  
Sergeant  I I  110%  $99.473.42  i  $47.82 hourly  

FROM JANUARY 1, 2020 THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2020 
Start  62.5%  $58,581.93  $28.16 hourly  
Act 120  65%  $60,925.20  $29.29 hourly  
One Year Service  67.5%  $63.268.48  $30.42 hourly  
Two Years Service  70%  $65,611.76  $31.54 hourly  
Three Years Service  72.5%  $67,955.03  $32.67 hourly  
Four Years Service  75%  $70,298.31  $33.80 hourly  
Five Years Service  80%  $74,984.86  $36.05 hourly  
Six Years Service  87.5%  $82.014.70  $39.43 hourly  
Seven Years Service  95%  $89,044.53  $42.81 hourly  
Eieht Years Service  100%  $93.731.08  $45.06 hourly  
Senzeant  110%  $103,104.19  $49.57 hourlv  

FROM JANUARY 1, 2021 THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2021 
Start  62.5%  $60,720.17  $29 .19 hourly  
Act 120  65%  $63,148.98  $30.36 hourly  
One Year Service  67.5%  $65,577.78  $31.53 hourly  
Two Years Service  70%  $68,006.59  $32.70 hourly  
Three Years Service  72.5%  $70.435.40  $33.86 hourly  
Four Years Service  75%  $72,864.20  $35.03 hourly  
FiveYears Service  80%  $77.721.82  $37.37 hourly  
Six Years Service  87.5%  $85,008.24  $40.87 hourly  
SevenYears Service  95%  $92,294.66  $44.37 hourly  
Eillht Years Service  100%  $97,152.27  $46.71 hourly  
Sergeant  110%  $106,867.50  $51.38 hourly  

For employees hired on orafter January 1, 2018, all salaries are keyed offofan Officer who has completed eight (8) years ofservice. New hires arepaid at 62.5% ofthat rate, new hires with Act 120 certification receive 65% ofthat rate; Officers who have completed one (1) year ofservice with the Borough are paid 67.5% ofthat rate; Officers who have completed two (2) years ofservice with the Borough are paid at 70% ofthat rate; Officers who have completed three (3) years ofservice with the Borough shall be paid at 72.5% ofthat rate; Officers who have completed four ( 4) years ofservice with the Borough shall be paid at 75% ofthatrate; Officers who have completed five (5) years of service with the Borough shall be paid at 80% ofthat rate; Officers who have completed six (6) years ofservice with theBorough shall be paid at 87.5% ofthat rate; and Officers who have completed seven (7) years ofservice with the Borough shall be paid at 95% of that rate. A Sergeant's salary is set at 110% ofthe salary ofan Officer who has completed eight {8) years ofservice with the Borough. 
For employees hired prior to January 1, 2018, all salaries shall be keyed offofan Officer who has completed eight (8) years ofservice with the Borough. Officers who 3 
YEARS OF SERV1CE : % OF ARTICLE II A BASE l COMPENSATION  
I 0  0  
1  0 :  
2  !0  
3  0  
4  0  
5  0.50%  
6  0.75%  
7  1.00%  
8  1.25%  
9  1.50%  
10  1.75%  
11  2.00%  
12  2.25%  
13  2.50%  
14  2.75%  
' 15  0 '  

have completed less than five (5) years ofservice with the Borough shall bepaid at 90% ofthat rate. Officers who have completed five ( 5) ormore years ofservice with the Borough shall be paid at 100% ofthat rate. A Sergeant's salary is set at 110% ofthe salary ofan Officer who has completed eight (8) years ofservice with the Borough. 
B. LONGEVITY 
In addition to wages, employees shall receive, based upon past service, longevity pay, to be paid annually on an employee's employment anniversary date. During an employee's first four (4) years ofemployment, he/she shall receive longevity pay in accordance with the scale which follows below. The maximum annual longevity benefit shall be capped at Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) in 2018, Two Thousand Seven Hundred and Fifty Dollars (S2,750.00) in 2019, and Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000.00) in 2020 and 2021. 
I 
i 
*For each year ofservice after 19 an Officer would receive additional longevity of0.25% ·with longevity capped at $2,500.00 in 2018, $2,750.00 in2019, and $3,000 in 2020 and 2021. 
3.001/o 16 3.25% 
17 3.50% 
18 3.75% 
*19 4.00% 
C. SHIFT DIFFEFERNTIAL 
Shift Differential in the amount ofTwenty-five Cents ($.25) per hours shall be paid for hours worked between 3:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. Shift differential in the amount ofFifty Cents ($0.50) perhour shall be paid for hours worked between 11:00 p.m. and 
7:00 a.m. In the event that the Borough institutes a 7:00 p.m. -3:00 a.m. shift, all hours worked on that shiftbyemployees scheduled to work that shift shall enjoy a shift differential benefit ofFifty Cents ($0.50) per hour. 
D. OVERTIME PAY 
Employees shall be paid at the rate oftime and one-halftime for all hours worked in excess offorty ( 40) hours inany work.week. Hours worked shall specifically include any vacation or compensatory time utilized during the said forty ( 40) hour periodbut shall not include sick time. 
E. COMPENSATORY TIME 
Each employee may elect to take compensatory time offin lieu ofpayment for overtime providing that same employee may not accumulate more than eighty (80) hours ofcompensatory time offat one time. Compensatory time offis to be computed at a rate oftime-and-one-half, i.e., for each overtime hour worked, an Officer gets one and one­halfhours off. The employee is required to provide at least five (5) days notice to the ChiefofPolice (orhis/her duly appointed designate) prior to scheduling any compensatory time. Court time and training time must be compensated and may not be elected for compensatory time. 
F. MISCELLANEOUS COMPENSATION 
1. Training Time and Other Scheduled Overtime 
a. 
All hours spent to satisfy Department authorized training, meetings, investigative work or related assignments shall be compensated at one and one-half(l ½) the Officer's current hourly rate ofpay as long as the training, meeting, investigate work or related assignment is scheduled immediately before or after the start offinish ofthe Officer's scheduled shift. 

b. 
Ifthe training, meeting, investigate work or related assignment is scheduled on an Officer's regular work day but not immediately before or after the Officer's shift, the Officer shall be compensated a minimum oftwo (2) hours and shall be compensated at the one and one-half(1 ½) hourly rate for any time exceeding the original two (2) hours. 

c. 
Should training, meetings, investigative work or related assignments be scheduled on an Officer's pass day, the Officer shall receive the rate established under the Call-Out provision of this section which requires a minimum offour ( 4) hours at the Officer's overtime rate. The Officer shall be compensated at the normal one and one-half (1 ½.) overtime hourly rate for any time exceeding the original four (4) hours. 

d. 
All training, meetings, investigative work or related assignments shall be scheduled at least one ( 1) week in advance whenever possible. 


2. Call Outs 
a. 
DEFINED: Any work performed by an Officer in which the Officer is summoned by the Department from an off-duty status to perform work outside ofthe normally scheduled shift. This includes transports and other duties or assignments except those specifically listed under Article II (F) (1) Training Time and Other Scheduled Overtime. This call out provision shall not include work performed immediately after a scheduled work shift. 

b. 
COMPENSATION: All call outs shall be compensated at a minimum offour (4) hours at the Officer's overtime rate. Ifa second and subsequent call-out arises during this initial four ( 4) hour period, then the same Officer will not be entitled to another four (4) hour minimwn, but shall be compensated at the normal overtime rate for all hours worked in excess ofthe original four ( 4) hour period. Furthermore, it is agreed that the employee is deemed to be working during the entire four ( 4) hour period and may be required to work the entire period. However, ifthe employee is released from the detail by the Supervisor, then any subsequent call-out shall be considered a separate event. Call-outs as defined in this section, with the exception ofinvestigative work, shall be offered vial seniority, irrespective ofrank. 


3. Outside Events 
All contracted services authorized by the Borough and the ChiefofPolice shall be paid at a minimum offour (4) hours at the Officer's overtime rate ofpay. Examples ofthis duty include all School District functions, road contractors and private enterprises wishing to utilize Police Officers for security purposes in the Borough. All opportunities for overtime generated by outside events shall be posted by the Chiefof 
police (so long as time pennits) and shall be offered via seniority, irrespective ofrank. The Officer shall be compensated at the normal overtime rate for all hours worked in excess ofthe original four (4) hour period. 
4. Miscellaneous Assignments 
a. 
Ifa contract is made for a call-out assignment and that opportunity is refused and then a second opportunity occurs, the next senior person will be contacted. The first denial will be deemed a denial for all successive opportwlities and there will be no repetition of calls to inquire about interest in successive call-out opportunities during that shift. 

b. 
Ifan employee is called by telephone and an answering machine is contacted, a message will be left on the machine and the next appropriate person will be contacted for the call-out. Ifthe next person is contacted and accepts before the previous employee returns the call after receiving his/her message on the answering machine, the succeeding person is awarded the call-out assignment. If, however, the person calls before the succeeding person accepts, then the first person is awarded the call-out assignment for that shift. 


5. Educational Pay 
Upon the attainment ofany ofthe following degrees in an educational field ofendeavor, compensation shall be paid at the following rates; 
Completion of: Annual Lump Sum Payment: Bachelor's Degree $600.00 Master's Degree $800.00 
This payment shall be based on the scheduled amount ofthe highest level of education attained and shall not be construed to be commutative. 
6. Uniform Allowance 
a. The first year an individual becomes a Police Officer, the Borough will provide One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) forunifonn and equipment provided that the employee will return all uniform and equipment items should the employee leave the employment ofthe Borough within three (3) years. Every year thereafter, the uniform allowance for Police Officers shall be Nine Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($950.00). Effective January 1, 2018, the uniform allowance for Police Officers shall be Nine Hundred and Fifty 
Dollars (S950.00). Effective January 1, 2020, it shall increase to 
One Thousand Dollars (S 1,000.00). The annual uniform allowance 
shall be paid in one lump swn, by separate check, in January of 
each calendar year. 
7. Reimbursable Expenses 
a. 
Compensation associated with training, conferences, and other work-related expenses shall be reimbursed by the Borough provided that it is: 

I. pre-approved by the ChiefofPolice; 
ii. documented by receipts; 
iii. a reasonable and necessary expense for meals, board or mileage; and 
iv. presented on a Department expense voucher. 

b. 
Mileage will be paid at the official IRS rate per mile for use ofa private vehicle. All mileage shall be calculated from the Borough building. 


8. Court Time 
Employees shall be compensated for appearance during non-working hours at court proceedings as witnesses or otherwise at their overtime rate according to the following scale ofminimum hours: 
Criminal Court 4 hours Overtime Civil Hearings 4 hours Overtime Pre-Trial 3 hours Overtime District Court 4 hours Overtime ifthe 
hearing is on the 
Officer's scheduled 
pass day 
District Court 2 hours Overtime ifthe hearing is on the Officer's regularly scheduled work day 
Statutory Appeals  4hours  Overtime  
Mental Health Hearings  4 hours  Overtime  
Juvenile Court  4 hours  Overtime  

Ifthe actual time spent in court or at a hearing would exceed the Officer's minimum guaranteed hours, then the Officer shall be compensated at his/her overtime rate for the additional time spent beyond his/her minimum guarantee. 
ID. BENEFITS 
A. VACATIONS 
The following vacation schedule shall be adhered to, based upon years of service: 
1 through 4 years completed 10 working days 
5 through 12 years completed 15 working days 
13 through 20 years completed 20 working days 
At the beginning ofeach year of service after 20 years ofservice completed through 25 years of 1 additional working day up service completed to 25 working days 
Over 25 years 27 working days 
Employees may "sell back" to the Borough at full rate (i.e. current base pay) five (5) days ofvacation time each year. Payment is to be received with the first pay in December. Onlyone (1) week ofvacation may be carried over to future years. 
Procedure for the selection ofvacations are set forth in ARTICLE IV ­WORKING CONDITIONS. 
B. HOLIDAYS There will be eleven (11) paidholidays per year, these holidays being: 
1. 
New Year' s Day 7. Veterans Day 

2. 
Good Friday 8. Thanksgiving Day 

3. 
Easter Day 9. Day following Thanksgiving Day 

4. 
Memorial Day 10. Christmas Eve 

5. 
Independence Day 11. Christmas Day 

6. 
Labor Day 


It is agreed that because Departmental operations do not allow these days to be taken as time offwhen they occur, each employee will receive, in addition to the regular pay for each day as it is worked, a lump-sum payment computed at the straight hourly rate ofpay for all eleven (11) holidays. This lump sum payment will be included as part ofthe final pay for the month ofOctober in each calendar year. On Christmas Eve, Thanksgiving Day and Independence Day holidays, a bargaining unit employee will be paid time and one-half (1 ½) in addition to the holiday benefit itselfwhen the bargaining unit employee actually works on the holiday. 
C. SICK LEAVE 
1. 
Bargaining unit members shall be entitled to fifteen (15) days of sick leave per year. The annual grant ofsick leave shall be made on the first day ofeach calendar year. 

2. 
Sick leave days which are not utilized shall be accumulated without limitation. At retirement, the Borough will buy back from employees all unused sick leave, up to a maximum ofone hundred fifty (150) days at a rate ofFifty Dollars ($50.00) per day. 

3. 
Employees may ••sell back" to the borough fixe (5) days ofsick leave each year from the current year's allotment ofsick days at full rate (i.e. current base pay rate) to be received with the first pay in December. 

4. 
Any employee who is absent more than three (3) consecutive days because ofillness may be required to submit to the Chief ofPolice a Physicians' certificate verifying that such absence was due to illness and said employee is physically fit to return to duty. In addition, the Borough reserves the right to have any employee who has been offwork three (3) or more consecutive days due to an alleged illness examined by a physician ofthe Borough's own choice. In the event that the Borough exercises its option to have such an employee so examined, said employee shall not be permitted to return to duty until the Borough's physician certifies that he/she is physically fit for duty. Any employee failing to submit the aforesaid Physician's certificate v.ithin seven (7) days after returning to duty or who refuses to be examined by the Borough's physician shall not be paid for the days he/she was absent. An employee qualifying for the aforesaid sick leave benefits shall be paid an amount equal to the regular salary he/she 


would have been paid had he/she worked for each day the employee was absent due to illness. 
5. 
Each employee shall he advised in writing by February28 ofeach year as to his/her total accumulated sick leave. 

6. 
Sick leave may be utilized in increments offom (4) hours when the employee is incapacitated by sickness or non work-related injury, or for medical, dental, optical or chiropractic visits. Sick leave may also be used to attend to either personal or family illnesses, injuries, medical, dental, optical o chiropractic visits. Familyis limited to spouse, children, mother, father, mother-in-law and father-in-law. 

7. 
After the first three (3) illnesses within a calendar yearin which an employee has used one (1) or more sick days, any successive requirements for use ofa sick day shall require that the employee notify the Police Desk ofthe nature ofthe problem necessitating the use ofthe sick day. In addition, a telephone number will be left with the Police Desk so that a contact point is had for the employee. Should the employee be required to leave his/her home or hospital, he/she will notify the Police Desk ofthe fact. The employee will also grant access to any visiting supervising Officer at any reasonable hom and fully and accurately inform him/her ofthe nature ofthe illness ofinjury. 

8. 
An employee on extended disability as ofthe first ofthe calendar year shall not receive the annual grant ofsick days until he/she is certified by a physician for return to full duty. 

9. 
In the event that an officer utilizes more than fifteen (15) sick days in a calendar year, without providing a Physician's certificate ofillness, the officer shall forfeit his entitlement to collect the annual longevity payment the following year. Any sick days taken dming the year for which the officer provides a Physician's certificate of illness shall not count towards the fifteen ( 15) day benchmark identified in this paragraph. For example, an officer that uses seventeen (17) sick days but provides a Physician's certificate ofillness for three (3) ofthe days shall be deemed to have used fourteen (14) sick days for purposes ofthe annual sick day/longevity waiver discussed in this paragraph no. 9. 


D. BEREAVEMENT LEAVE 
In the event ofthe death ofthe employee's father, mother, son, daughter, sister, brother, spouse, father-in-law or mother-in-law, said employee shall be entitled to an emergency leave offive (5) working days at regular pay. 
E. ON-DUTY DISABILITY PAY 
Any employee who is injured in the performance ofhis/her duties on behalfofthe Borough, and by reason thereofis temporarily incapacitated from performing his/her Borough duties, shall be paid by the Borough his/her full rate ofsalary. During that time, salary for temporary incapacity shall be paid by the Borough. Any worker's compensation received or collected by any such employee for such period shall be turned over to the Borough, and ifsuch payment shall not be made by the employee, the amount so due the Borough shall be deducted from any salary then or thereafter becoming due and owing. An officer who is receiving Heart and Lung Benefits is receiving his full salary, based upon a regular schedule. Therefore, the officer will not be paid overtime for training orcourt time or for attending a meeting with the Borough during regular business hours. These duties will be part ofthe officer's regular schedule while on Heart & Lung Benefits. 
F. INSURANCE 
1. Off-Duty Long Term Disability 
a. 
The Borough shall provide an insurance policy for the employees providing off-duty long term disability benefits whereby an employee who is injured offthejob or suffers an extended illness shall receive, after a ninety (90) day waiting period, a benefit equivalent to two-thirds (2/3) ofhiSJher base pay. The Borough shall assume 100% ofthe cost ofthat benefit. It is agreed that any policy provided shall contain the provision that any benefit amount due is payable until the death ofthe employee or age sixty-five (65), whichever occurs first. 

b. 
It is understood and agreed that an employee cannot receive both the sick leave pay from the Borough and the benefit provided by the Borough under the aforesaid disability policy for the same periods oftime. During any such overlappingperiods, the Borough shall deduct from the employee's pay an amount equal to the benefit which he/she is entitled to receive under the aforesaid insurance policy. 

C. 
It is agreed that an employee cannot use any ofhisther accumulated sick time ifhe/she is injured during the course of secondary, non work-related employment. 


2. Health Insurance 
a. The Borough shall provide the High.mark PPO Blue Plan with no in-network deductible to all eligible bargaining unit members. Employees hired prior to January 1, 2018 shall pay a percentage of the premium, with a cap on monthly contributions, at the following rates: 
Year 
Percentage 
Monthly Cap 
2018 
0% 
$0.00 
2019 
0% 
$0.00 
2020 
3% 
$78.00 
2021 
3% 
$83.00 

Employees hired on or after to January 1, 2018 shall pay a percentage ofthe premium, with a cap on monthly contributions, at the following rates, determined by years ofservice with the Borough: 
Years ofService 
Less than One 
More than One, Less than Two 
More than Two, Less than Three 
More than Three Percentage 
10% 
11.5% 
13.5% 
15% 
Monthly Cap 
$345.00 
$366.00 
$389.00 
$414.00 
The Borough shall pay the remaining cost ofthe premium. 
Employees shall be responsible for all oftheir own co-pays. 
The Borough ofDormont may, in order to reduce costs or cost 
increases, change plans and/or carriers to "substantially 
comparable" coverage. "Substantially comparable" coverage in 
this contract does not mean equal or equivalent. The union 
however, retains the right to grieve the Borough's determination that a plan and/or carrier is "substantially comparable." When the Borough decides to change the plan or carrier, it will provide the union with details ofthe current plan and the new "substantially comparable'' plan. Ifthe union does not agree that the plan or carrier selected by the Borough is "substantially comparable," it will so state, in writing, to the Borough within fourteen (14) calendar days ofthe plan and/or provider being presented to the union by the Borough, or such longer period as mutually agreed to by the parties in writing, identifying the reasons. In that event, the Borough may not unilaterally implement the proposed new plan and/or carrier provided; however, it may immediately process the dispute before a neutral arbitrator selected pursuant to the arbitration step ofthe grievance procedure. The decision ofthe arbitrator on this "substantially comparable" issue shall be issued within forty-five (45) calendar days ofthe union's \\Titten notice contesting that the plan selected by the Borough is "substantially comparable" and shall be final and binding and "'ill determine if the Borough is authorized to implement the new plan or provider. 
b. The Borough shall also provide high-option Dental Plan coverage for the employee and their families. The Borough will pay Twenty Dollars ($20.00) per employee per month toward said plan. The Borough will pay one-third (li3) of the remaining cost and the employee will pay two-thirds (2/3) ofsaid cost. 
3. Life Insurance 
The Borough agrees to provide the following coverage and to pay all premiums necessary to cover the employees as follows: Life insurance ofFifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) \Vith accidental death and dismemberment ofOne Hundred Thousand Dollars (Sl00,000.00). 
G. PERSONAL DAYS 
Each employee is to be granted two (2) personal days during the calendar year, to be selected at his/her option. Procedures for the scheduling ofpersonal days are set forth in ARTICLE IV -WORKING CONDITIONS. 
H. There will be no accrual ofany form ofpaid leave during any type of leave ofabsence in excess of30 days. For example, the lump sum payment for holidays in Article III, Paragraph B, will not include the payment for any holidays during the period that the police officer was on a leave ofabsence in excess ofthirty days. 
IV. WORKING CO1'1TIITIONS 
A. SENIORITY 
Theparties agree to accept the principal ofseniority in respect to the picking of predetermined schedules and vacation. After six ( 6) months ofcontinuous service with 
the Borough, each employee shall have seniority within their respectivejob classification (Police Officer or Police Sergeant). Seniority credit is within rank or grade and cannot be transferred between job classifications as it applies to the picking ofschedules, vacations or the eligibility ofshift work or shift overtime. 
Call out rights will be based on total length ofcontinuous Police service with the Borough. 
All other aspects ofseniority ( e.g. longevity, accrued vacation time and accrued sick leave time) shall be by the total length ofservice regardless ofjob classification with the Borough. 
B. SCHEDULING 
It is agreed that all scheduling will be unique to the job classification. A work schedule will be established by the ChiefofPolice in which the available shifts and corresponding pass days for that shift will be clearly indicated. Each scheduling period will commence and end on the following rotation: 
1. 
First Monday in January until the Sunday before the first Monday in April. 

2. 
First Monday in April until the Sundaybefore the first Monday in July. 

3. 
First Monday in Julyuntil the Sunday before the first Monday in October. 

4. 
First Monday in October until the Sunday before the first Monday in January. 


The ChiefofPolice will detennine what shifts to post, including pass days. During each three (3) month scheduling period, pass days will rotate within each shift. 
The ChiefofPolice will post the available schedule one (1) month before the end ofeach preceding period. Each employee shall be contacted and directed to pick an available shift. All contacts, requests, and picks will be done via seniority within the job classification from most senior officer to least senior Officer. Ifan employee fails to pick a shift schedule within three (3) working days from the direction ofthe ChiefofPolice, that employee will forfeit all seniority rights for schedule selection within the job classification for that scheduling period. 
Theposted shift schedules will adhere to the following guidelines: 
1. 
All shifts will have two (2) consecutive days offwithin the work week. 

2. 
The ChiefofPolice will at all times attempt to schedule sixteen (16) hours offbetween shifts. The only exception to this guideline will be when denied manpower exceeds the available personnel or when the employee is working an overtime shift. 


3. Switching hours will be permitted between employees. Switching of entire rotations is prohibited. The responsibility for the coverage ofa shift is always the responsibility ofthe employee who is originally scheduled to work that shift. 
It is agreed that Police Officers will report for duty and be able to commence working fifteen (15) minutes before the regular scheduled hour for them to report to work. Police Officers will be granted forty-five (45) minute lunch periods each shift. 
C. ASSIGNMENT OF OVERTIME 
1. For the purposes ofdetermining the assignment ofovertime, three (3) daily work shifts are established "'ith respective hours ofeach shift: 
Shift A: 7:00 AM to 3:00 PM Shift B: 3:00 PM to 11:00 PM Shift C: 11:00 PM to 7:00 AM 
Ifa shift other than those enumerated above now exists or is established in the future, assignment will be made to one (1) ofthe three (3) enumerated shifts based on the time allocation ofthe majority ofhours ofthe odd shift v.ithin the three (3) daily work shifts. For example, a shift established from 8:00 PM to 4:00 AM will be identified as part ofShift C, since five (5) ofthe hours worked on that shift fall within the 11:00 PM to 
7:00 AM time block for Shift C. Ifan odd shift was to be created so that the hours worked were split evenly between two established shifts, assignment to a shift "\\-ill be at the discretion ofthe ChiefofPolice. 
All overtime assignments shall be offered in accordance within the shift and by seniority as follows: 
When additional work must be performed on any shift or when an employee is absent and cannot work his/her regular work shift due to disabilities caused by accident or illness, the necessity to appear in court as a witness, death in the family, or approved leave ofabsence, and a substitute is needed, the call out procedure will be completed in the following order: 
1. 
Dormont Policemen on a pass day but working the same shift. 

2. 
Dormont Policemen on a pass day but not working the same shift. 

3. 
Dormont Policemen not on a pass day and working other shifts, on a straight seniority basis. 

4. 
Splitting the shift into four (4) hour segments and offering it to officers pursuant to paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 above. 


In the event that none ofthese methods allow the shift to be filled, the Borough shall have the right to hold an officer over from a preceding shift. 
2. 
During vacation periods, itis understood that Police Officers will work their regular pass days when scheduled by the ChiefofPolice. 

3. 
The Borough reserves the rightto schedule overtime for 4 hour periods at anytime. 

4. 
Ifan emergency situation occurs, such as a fire, bad accident or any other such occurrence that poses a threat to the public safety, heath or welfare, it is agreed that any employee may be assigned to abate the situation regardless ofwhether the work is overtime ofnot, irrespective ofseniority. 

5. 
Ifan employee is called by telephone and an answering machine is contacted, a message will be left on the machine and the next appropriate person will be contacted for overtime. Ifthe next person is contacted and accepts before the previous employee returns the call after receiving his/her message on the answering machine, the succeedingperson is awarded the overtime assignment. If, however, the first person calls beforethe succeeding person accepts, then the first person is awarded the overtime. 

6. 
Ifcontact is made for an overtime assignment and that opportunity is refused and then a second opportunity occurs, the next senior person will be contacted. The first denial will be deemed a denial for all successive opportunities and there will be no repetition ofcalls to inquire about interest in successive overtime during that shift. 

7. 
Anyposted overtime shall be filled a minimum of72 hours before the start ofthe overtime shift. Ifthere are less than 72 hours remaining when an overtime shift becomes available, it shall be filled immediately. The provisions for calling officers in Item 5 ofthe Assignment ofovertime shall be followed when filling the overtime to meet the 72 hour provision. Any officer who is aware ofposted overtime may make Supervisors aware in the advance that he/she will take the overtime ifthe opportunity to work that overtime comes down to him/her. Ifan officer takes advantage ofthis opportunity to leave notice ofintentto take overtime, it is that officer's responsibility to see ifhe/she was awarded the overtime to be present on duty ifthey were. 


D. WORKWEEK 
The work week shall start at 7:00 AM Monday. 
E. SHIFT REQUIREMENTS 
The Borough shall have the inherent managerial prerogative to determine the number ofofficers in the Department, the number ofofficers assigned to a shift, and whether officers absent from a shift will be replaced. The Borough shall not be required to have any number ofofficers on a shift, nor shall it be required to have a particular number ofofficers ofany rank on a shift. The minimum staffing requirements set forth in prior collective bargaining agreement has been eliminated. 
1. The ChiefofPolice shall work Monday through Friday from 7:00 AM to 
3:00 PM. Iftwo (2) overtime spots are created on any given shift due to officers being offofwork, the ChiefofPolice may elect to fill one ofthe spots on his own. This shall only apply to shift overtime. 
F. TRAINING 
All oppomurities to attend schools/training which are deemed appropriate by the ChiefofPolice ·will be posted in advance. Any interested officer will have the opportunity to sign up and present his qualifications to be considered for that school/training. 
The ChiefofPolice will make the final decision concerning all training assignments, and the Chief's decision shall not be subject to the Grievance Procedure and Arbitration Provisions ofthe Agreement. Ifan Officer does not sign up for training, the Chiefmay still assign that Officer for training. Ifthere is not sufficient time to post the training oppomurity in advance, the Sergeants/OICs on duty will call Officers to find out ifthey are interested. 
G. SPECIAL ASSIGNMENTS 
Special Assignments will be defined as those assignments that result in regular, recurring, O.T., that require some specialized training to perform, including, but not limited to: DARE Officers, DANET/Drug Task Force, Crime Scene Technician, etc. 
1. 
All openings for Special Assignments will be posted and any interested officer will have the oppomurity to sign up and present his qualifications/desires to be considered for that Special Assignment. 

2. 
The Chiefwill meet with all non-candidate Sergeants and obtain their input into the selection for Special Assignment. 

3. 
Each Special Assignment '"ill be for a term ofthree years at which point it will be posted again. The re-posting ofa Special Assignment will not preclude an officer currently assigned to the position from applying for another term. 

4. 
The ChiefofPolice will make all final decisions relating to Special Assignments, and the Chiefs decision shall not be subject to the Grievance Procedure and Arbitration Provisions ofthe Agreement. The Association agrees that seniority is not a factor in determining Special Assignments. 


V. PENSION AND RETIREMENT 
A. The parties hereto acknowledge that the Borough has provided for a Police Pension Fund under Ordinance No. 1457. All Police Officers shall be covered by said pension fund. It is the intention ofthe parties that the Police Pension Plan shall be in compliance with Act 600, as amended, and as it may be amended in the future. 
B. The final average monthly salary ofsaid pension is to be calculated on the basis ofthe employees' last thirty-six (36) months ofemployment. 
C. The normal monthly retirement benefit shall be equal to fifty percent (50%) ofthe employee's final monthly average salary. 
D. Employees shall be eligible for normal retirement after twenty-five (25) years ofservice and attainment ofage fifty (50). 
E. There shall be a survivor's benefit equal to fifty percent (50%) ofthe participant's benefit, payable to a surviving spouse for the remainder of the spouse's life. Ifthere is no surviving spouse or ifthe spouse dies, the participant's children will share the benefit until the age ofeighteen (18), or until age 23 ifattending college (minimum ofseven credits per semester). 
F. There shall be a provision for one hundred percent (100%) vesting after twelve (12) years ofservice, so that an eligible participant would receive a benefit at normal retirement equal to their accrued benefit, which would be defined as fifty percent (50%) ofthe final monthly average salary calculated at the date oftermination, multiplied by the ratio ofcompleted service to date oftermination over service to normal retirement. 
G. An Officer who shall incur a total and permanent disability, which is a direct result of, and which occurs in, the line ofduty ofemployment, shall receive a disability retirement benefit in an amount equal to 50% ofthe Officer's salary at the time the disability was incurred, provided that any Officer who receives a disability retirement shall have his/her disability benefits offset orreduced by the amount ofany benefits received for the 
same injuryunder the Social Security Act (49 Stat. 620, 42 U.S.C. §301 et seq.). 
H. An additional service increment benefit shall be added equal to Twenty Dollars ($20.00) per month for each completed year ofservice in excess of twenty-five (25) with a maximum increment ofOne Hundred Dollars (S100.00). 
I. Ifthe pensionplan should need the contributions ofthe Police Officers to remain actuarially sound, it is agreed that Police Officer contributions, to the legal maximum ifnecessary, can be required before the Borough would have to make contributions to the police pension plan from its general revenues. It is also agreed that before such contributions are required ofthe Police that the Borough would allocate all ofthe Act 205 monies coming into the Borough from the Commonwealth because it has a police department with a police pension plan. Except in those circumstances, the Borough remains free to allocate its Act 205 monies pursuant to the authority and requirements in act 205. The Borough and the Association have agreed that Police Officer contributions to the pension plan shall be seven percent (8%). 
J. Each employee who shall retire and receive a retirement benefit shall be entitled to receive a cost ofliving adjustment to the amount ofbenefit payable to the employee exclusive ofany service increment benefit. Such cost ofliving adjustment shall bedetermined on an annual basis by applying a multiplier which is the version ofthe national CPI-U generally held to most accurately measure the ''market basket" ofgoods and services bought and sold and shall not exceed any ofthe following limits: (1) the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W) for the year in which the participant was last employed as an employee ofthe employer; (2) the total retirement benefits payable under theplan shall not exceed seventy-five percent (75%) ofthe employee's final monthly average salary; (3) the total cost of living increase shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) ofthe participant's retirement benefit under the plan; and (4) the cost ofliving adjustment shall not impair the actuarial soundness ofthe Pension Plan. 
K. The parties hereto also agree that the Borough \vill pay to each employee who retires after the effective date ofthis Agreement the sum ofThree Hundred Fifty Dollars ($350.00) per month toward the purchase ofhealth insurance coverage. An employee shall not be eligible for this payment if, after retirement, he/she obtains outside employment that provides health insurance coverage, or has health insurance through hiS!her spouse's coverage. An employee must obtain health insurance coverage to be eligible for said payment. Said payments shall continue until the employee is eligible for Medicare. 
L. The Killed in Service benefit has been assumed bythe Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Borough shall no longerprovide any benefit for an officer killed-in-service. 
M. DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN 
Section 1 Definitions 
DROP -The Deferred Retirement Option Plan created as an optional form of benefit under the existing Borough ofDormont Police Pension Plan. 
DROP Account -A Separate ledger account created to accumulate the DROP pension benefit for a DROP participant. 
Member-a full-time Borough ofDormont police officer covered by the Plan. 
Participant -A memberwho is eligible for normal retirement and who has elected to participate in the DROP program. 
Plan -The Borough ofDormont Police Pension Plan adopted pursuant to Act 600. 
Section2 Drop Pension 
(A) 
Eligibility. Effective January 1, 2007, members ofthe Borough ofDormont Police Association bargaining unit that have not retired prior to the implementation ofthe DROP program, may enter into the DROP on the first day ofany month following the attainment ofage 52 and the completion of26 or more years ofcredited service with the Borough ofDormont. 

(B) 
Written Election. An eligible Member ofthe Plan electing to participatein the DROP program must complete and execute a "DROP Election Form'' prepared by the BoroughofDormont Manager and/or the planadministrator, which shall evidence the Member's participation in the DROP program, and document the Participant's rights and obligations under the DROP. The form must be signedbythe Member and the Chief Administrative Officer ofthe Plan and submitted to Borough ofDormont, at least 30 days ofthe date on which the memberwishes the DROP election to be effective. The DROP Election Form shall include an irrevocable notice to the Borough ofDormont bythe Member, that the Member shall terminate from employment with Borough ofDormont Police Department effective on a specific date three (3) years from the effective date of the DROP election. In addition, all retirement documents required bythe Borough of 


Dormont Police Pension Plan Administrator must be filed and presented to the Borough ofDormont Commissioners for approval ofretirement and commencement ofthe monthly pension benefit. Once the retirement application has been approved by the Commissioners, it shall become irrevocable. 
After a member enters the DROP program, contributions to the pension plan by the Participant and the Township will cease, and the amount ofthe monthlybenefits will be frozen except for any applicable cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) increases awarded to all pension recipients. 
Members shall be advised to consult a Tax Advisor, oftheir choice, prior to considering the DROP program, as there may be serious tax implications and/or consequences to participating in the DROP program. 
(C) 
Limitation on Pension Accrual. After the effective date ofthe DROP election, the Participant shall no longer earn or accrue additional years ofcontinuous service for pension purposes. 

(D) 
Benefit Calculation. For all Plan purposes, continuous service ofa Member participating in the DROP program shall remain as it existed on the effective date of commencement ofparticipation in the DROP program. Service thereafter shall not be recognized or used for the calculation or determination ofany benefits payable by the Borough ofDormont Police Pension Plan. The average monthly payofthe Member for pension calculation purposes shall remain as it existed on the effective date of commencement ofparticipation in the DROP program. Earnings or increases in earnings thereafter shall not be recognized or used for the calculation or determination ofany benefits payable by the Plan. The pension benefit payable to the Participants shall increase only as a result ofCost-of-Living Adjustments ( COLAs ), effective on or after the date ofthe member's participation in the DROP program. 

(E) 
Payments to DROP Account. The monthly retirement benefits that would have been payablehad the member elected to cease employment and receive a normal retirement benefit shall, upon the Member commencing participation in the DROP program, be credited on the first day ofeach month into a separate ledger account established by the Plan Administrator to track and accumulate the Participant's monthly pensionbenefits. This account shall be designated the DROP Account. The DROP Account shall not contain a guaranteed interest rate. The account shall be managed by the Plan Administrator pursuant to the same fiduciary obligations and principles applicable to management ofthe municipal pension plans. The DROP Account shall be an interest-bearing account, which shall be compounded monthly. All interest earned on the DROP Account will be for the benefit ofthe Participant. All interest credited to the DROP Account will be included in the final cash settlement. 

(F) 
Early Termination. A Participant may withdraw from the DROP program at any time and effectuate a complete retirement from service. No penalty shall be imposed for early termination ofDROP participation. However, the Participant shall not be permitted to make any withdrawals from the DROP Account until DROP participation has ended. 

(G) 
Payout. Upon the tennination date set forth in the DROP Election Form or on such date as the Participant withdraws or is terminated from the DROP program, if earlier, the normal retirement benefits payable to the Participant or the participant's beneficiary, ifapplicable, shall be paid directly to the participantor beneficiary and shall no longerbe credited to the DROP Account. Within thirty (30) days following the actual termination ofa Participant's employment with Borough ofDormont, the accumulated balance in the DROP Account shall be paid to the Participant in a single lump-sum payment. Such payment shall be made eitherin cash, subject to any federal withholding as may be required, or as a direct rollover to an Individual Retirement Account (IRA). If the Participant selects the rollover option, he or she must also submit the appropriate paperwork from the IRA custodian within twenty (20) days following termination. 

(H) 
Death. Ifa Participant dies before the DROP Account balance is paid, the participant's beneficiary under Act 600 shall have the same rights as the Participant to withdraw the DROP Account balance. Themonthlybenefit credited to the participant's DROP Account during the month ofthe Participant's death shall be the final monthly benefit for DROP participation. 

(I) 
Killed-In-Service Survivor Benefit. The Killed in Service benefit has been assumed by the Commonwealth ofPennsylvania and the Borough shall no longer provide any benefit for an officer killed-in-service. 

(J) 
Amendment. Any amendments to the DROP Ordinance shall be consistent with the provisions covering deferred retirement option plans set forth in any applicable collective bargaining agreement or state or federal law, and shallbe binding upon all future Participants and upon all Participants who have balances in their DROP Accounts. 


Section 3 Effective Date The Effective Date ofthe DROP program will be January 1, 2007. 
Section 4 Severability The provisions ofthe DROP Ordinance shall be severable, and ifany ofits provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional orillegal, the validity ofany ofthe remaining provisions ofthis Ordinance shall notbe affected thereby. It is hereby expressly declared as the intent ofBorough ofDormont that this Ordinance has been adopted as ifsuch unconstitutional or illegal provision or provisions had not been included herein. 
Section 5 Pending Legislation 
In the event ofthe passage oflegislation governing DROPs in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, this Ordinance shall be amended to comply with any new legal requirements set for thin such legislation. The application ofany amendments to police officers actively employed as ofthe effective date ofany such legislation shall be governed by and consistent with constitutional principles applicable to the pension and retirement benefits. 
N. PRETAX PENSION CONTRIBUTIONS 
The Borough shall take the necessary steps in order to file any application and obtain any governmental approvals so that police officers will be able to make their pension contributions on a pretax basis effective January 1, 2007. Under current law, this only applies to federal income tax. Internal Revenue Code §414(b)(2). The pre-tax employee pension contributions are contingent upon the Borough obtaining any necessary application and/or obtaining the necessary governmental approvals. 
VI. 
MISCELLANEOUS 

A. 
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS 


Police Officers need not reside within the territorial limits ofthe Borough. In the event that Police Officers chooses to reside outside ofthe Borough, he/she must establish residency within a thirty-five (35) mile radius ofthe Dormont Borough Municipal Building. 
In the event that a Police Officer establishes residency outside ofthe aforesaid thirty-five (35) mile limitation: such employee shall be subject to disciplinary action, including the right ofthe Borough to discharge said employee. 
B. NO STRIKE CLAUSE 
The parties hereto mutually agree that there shall be no strike, work stoppage, slowdown, sit-do\\'Il or picketing by employees or their representatives nor shall there be any lock-out by the Borough. 
C. GRIEVANCE PROCEDlJRE 
1. 
In the event there is any grievance, dispute or difference between an employee and the Borough with respect to the interpretation or application ofany provision ofthe Agreement, there shall be an earnest effort made to settle or dispose of such matters promptly by negotiations between the appropriate designated representatives ofsuch parties in the manner provided in this Grievance Procedure. For convenience, all such grievance, disputes and differences \\ill be called grievance in the Agreement and its administration. 

2. 
The grievance and arbitration procedures hereinafter set forth shall govern and apply to all grievances between the employees and the Borough involving the interpretation and application ofany ofthe provisions ofthis Agreement, provided, however, that disputes involving suspensions and dismissals shall be governed by the applicable provisions ofthe Pennsylvania Borough Code and Civil Service Rules ofthe Borough. The employee, however, shall have the right to grieve all matters ofdiscipline, provided that once an Officers selects to proceed under the grievance procedure rather that the Civil Service procedure, the selection can not be changed. 

3. 
An employees' Grievance Board is hereby established. The number of board members, their term ofoffice and manner ofappointment shall be determined by the employees. In the event a Grievance Board member has a grievance he/she shall not sit as a Grievance Board memberin the particular case. Members ofthe Grievance Board shall not be compensated by the Borough for the time spent in the function. However, if a Grievance Board member loses time from his/her regular shift while attending a meeting with the Borough representative, h/she shall receive his/her regular pay for such shift and will not be required to make up such lost time. 

4. 
A grievance shall be negotiated when necessary to reach a final decision in each ofthe following steps between the duly designated and appropriate representatives ofthe parties specified in each step. 

5. 
Ifno decision is made by a representative at any step in the time and manner herein specified, such failure to render a decision shall beconstrued as an unsatisfactory decision, and the party entitled to such a decision shall have the right to take an appeal to the next step in the same time and manner as an appeal in the case of unsatisfactory decision. 

6. 
The following are the grievance steps and representative ofthe parties therein: 


Step 1: Any employee who has a grievance shall, within five (5) Days ofthe occurrence thereof, discuss the same with the ChiefofPolice. 
Step 2: Ifwithin five ( 5) days there is no satisfactory settlement in thereof, the grievance shall be submitted by the aggrieved employee to the Grievance Board. The Grievance Board shall within seven (7) days from the date it receives the grievance submit the same to the Borough Manager. 
Step 3: Ifwithin seven (7) days ofthe submission ofthe grievance to the Borough Manager there is no satisfactory settlement 
ofthe grievance, the Union may request a list ofseven (7) 
neutral grievance arbitrators from the Federal Mediation 
and Conciliation Service or the Pennsylvania Bureau of 
Mediation. The parties shall meet within five (5) days after 
the receipt ofsuch a list. The parties shall choose a neutral 
arbitrator by alternate striking from the list ofseven (7) 
"With the first strike obligation alternating from grievance to 
grievance beginning with the Employer first. 
7. 
The neutral arbitrator shall be authorized only to interpret and apply the provisions ofthis Agreement insofar as shall be necessary for ruling upon a grievance, but shall not have authority to alter or amend in any way the provisions ofthis Agreement. The decision ofthe arbitrator shall be final and binding on both parties. Such decision and the reasons in support hereof, shall be in writing. 

8. 
Grievance procedures must be initiated and appeals taken in the manner and within the time limits set forth in each ofthe grievance steps outlined herein in order to be considered. Failure to comply with grievance procedures shall bar further discussion or appeal. 

9. 
The fee and expenses ofthe neutral arbitrator in the grievance procedure shall be borne equally by both parties. 


D. REOPENING PROVISIONS 
1. The parties agree that during the term ofthis contract, it is not to be reopened for pay raises or pay reductions without approval ofa majority ofthe bargaining unit and with the agreement ofmanagement. 
E. POLICE BILL OF RIGHTS 
1. 
When an anonymous complaint is made against a Police Officer and no corroborative evidence is obtained, the complaint shall be deemed as unfounded and any record ofit shall be expunged after one (1) year. 

2. 
When any complaint is filed greater than six (6) months after the alleged event complained ofwhich, iftrue could not lead to a criminal charge, such complaint shall be classified as unfounded. 

3. 
Ifan interviewed or interrogated Police Officer writes a statement, has a transcript taken or any mechanical record made, a copy ofthe statement or record must beprovided to the Police Officer at no cost to the Officer. 

4. 
In the event that a criminal charge is brought against a Police Officer, a copy ofall written complaints, statements, and any records involved in an investigation ofalleged misconduct must also be provided to the Police Officer. 

5. 
Ifcriminal charges can be brought against the Police Officer as a result of a complaint ofalleged misconduct, the Police Officer shall have afforded Garrity protections to any statements he or she is required to make during the course ofan employment investigation. 

6. 
At the request ofthe Police Officer who is being interviewed or interrogated, he/she shall have the right to have a representative from the Police Association present at all times during the interview or interrogation. The interview or interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonable period oftime until such representation canbeobtained. 

7. 
The Police Officer shall have a right to a hearing before a neutral arbitrator to decide any issues or resolve any disputes relative to his/her employment or benefits as set for the in this Agreement. 


F. DRUG AND ALCOHOL POLICY 
The Borough reserves the right to negotiate a Drugand Alcohol Testing and Treatment Program Clause within the terms ofthis collective bargaining agreement. 
G. PAST PRACTICE -AS IS CLAUSE 
All existing benefits, practices, and working conditions previously enjoyed by the members ofthe bargaining unit that are not modified by this Agreement shall remain "as is." 
H. PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS 
The parties agree that during the term ofthis Agreement should the Borough decide to hire part time Police Officers, their utilization will be negotiated with the Union and their working conditions will be governed by an addendum to this contract. 
I. DISCIPLINE 
In the event the ChiefofPolice imposes a disciplinary suspension without pay upon an officer, and the suspension without pay survives the officer's appeals through either civil service or the contractual grievance procedure, the suspended officer shall forfeit his or her entitlement to collect the annual longevity payment for the following year. 
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have hereunto set their hands and seals. 
WITNESS: 
WITNESS: 
DOR.\.fONT POLICE ASSOCIATION 


