COPY

)

AGREEMENT
Between
The Crafton Police Wage and Policy Unit
And
I

The Borough of Crafton
Effective January I, 2020
Through
December 3 l, 2024

COPY

TABLE OF CONTENTS

)

ARTICLE I:

RECOGNITION

ARTICLE II:

DEFINITIONS

ARTICLE III:

RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PARTIES

ARTICLE IV:

MANAGEMENT

ARTICLE V:

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

ARTICLE VI:

LAYOFFS, SUSPENSION AND DISCHARGE

ARTICLE VII:

LONGEVITY INCREMENTS

ARTICLE VIII:

SHIFT CONTROL

ARTICLE IX:

WITNESS FEES AND COMPENSATION

ARTICLEX:

UNIFORM ALLOWANCE AND REPLACEMENT

ARTICLE XI:

RESIDENCE AND SCHOOLING

ARTICLE XII:

INDEMNITY AND LEGAL REPRESENTATION

ARTICLE XIII:

PRIVATE DUTY

ARTICLE XIV:

VACATION, HOLIDAY AND LEAVE DAYS

ARTICLE XV

INJURY, ILLNESS AND INSURANCE

ARTICLE XVI:

PENSION BENEFIT AMENDMENTS

ARTICLE XVII:

BASIC SALARY

ARTICLE XVIII:

CALL BACK PAY

ARTICLE XIX:

STATUTORY SAVINGS CLAUSE

ARTICLE XX:

SAVINGS BONDS

ARTICLE XXI:

DUES CHECK OFF

ARTICLE XXII:

SCHEDULING/OVERTIME

COPY

ARTICLE XXIIl:

TRADING SHIFTS

ARTICLE XXIV:

PHYSICAL FITNESS

ARTICLE XXV:

PERMANENT SCHEDULES

ARTICLE XXVI:

MODIFICATION

ARTICLE XXVII:

LENGTH OF THE AGREEMENT

1e,msm11

ii

COPY

AGREEMENT

)
Made this __

day of __

, 2020.
by and between

THE CRAFTON POLICE WAGE AND POLICY UNIT
AND
THE BOROUGH OF CRAFTON, a municipal corporation of the County of Allegheny,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
WlTNESSETH THAT:
WHEREAS, the Crafton Police Wage and Policy Unit was certified by the Pennsylvania
Labor Relations Board on February 8, 1984, as the exclusive representative of the members of
the Police Department of the Borough of Crafton, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania; and
WHEREAS, pursuant to the authority of Act No. 111 of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, approved the 24 th day of June, 1968, as amended, collective bargaining between
the Police Officers and their public employers is directed and authorized; and

)

WHEREAS, pursuant to said Act No. 111, and the certification of the Pennsylvania Labor
Relations Board, the Crafton Police Wage and Policy Unit did designate bargaining agents to
bargain collectively with the Borough of Crafton concerning the terms and conditions of their
employment, including compensation, hours, working conditions, retirement, pension and other
benefits; and
WHEREAS, the Borough of Crafton, pursuant to the authority of said Act No. 111, did
name and appoint its representative for the conduct of collective bargaining with the Crafton
Police Wage and Policy Unit; and
WHEREAS, pursuant to the authority of said Act No. 111 and the collective bargaining
process conducted thereunder, the parties hereto have resolved the matters of employment and
the relationship between the Crafton Police Wage and Policy Unit and Crafton Borough as the
public employer; and
WHEREAS, the parties hereto desire to effect a written Agreement setting forth the terms
of employment, wages and benefits for the period January l, 2020 through December 31, 2024.
NOW THEREFORE, in consideration of the foregoing, the mutual promises herein contained
and intending to be legally bound hereby, the parties hereto agree as follows:

( 8-lllS6ll 11

3

COPY

ARTICLEI: RECOGNITION

)

A.
The Borough recognizes the Crafton Police Wages and Policy Unit as the sole and
exclusive collective bargaining representative concerning the tetms and conditions of
employment, including compensation, hours, working conditions, retirement, pensions, and other
benefits for all full-time and regular part-time Police officers, including but not limited to
Patrolmen, Sergeants and Captains and excluding the Chief of Police and other management level
employees as set forth in the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board's February 8, 1984 Nisi Order
of Certification at Case No. PF-R-83-67-W.
B.
The Police recognize that the Council of the Borough of Crafton is subject to the
municipal statutes, laws and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and cannot, and
does not, make any agreement not pennitted thereunder.
C.
The Police recognize that the direct supervision of the Police - the time, place and
manner - is the responsibility of the Mayor and further that the Mayor is an elected official and
not an employee of the Borough Council.

ARTICLEII: DEFINITIONS
A.
Police Officer or Officer: Each and every full time person employed by the
Borough wearing the Police unifonn, excluding deskmen, auxiliary police, school guards and the
Police Chief.

)

B.
C.
Act l l l.

Police Force: Any and all Police Officers employed by the Borough.
Employer: Crafton Borough functioning through its elected officials as defined in

D.
Parties: The Borough and the Crafton Police Wage and Policy Unit, which is the
collective bargaining representative of the Crafton Borough Police Officers.
E.

Widow: The designated spouse of the Police Officer.

F.
Administrative Head: The Mayor of Crafton Borough in his/her exercise of the
responsibilities as set forth in the Borough Code.
G.
President.

Public Safety Committee: The Committee of Council appointed by the Council

H.
Dates for Calculation of Benefits: All benefits, time, rates of pay or others, shall
be calculated from the beginning date of the Police Officer's employment.

I.
Break in Service: Continuous employment shall be broken by discharge for cause,
absence due to physical disability for more than one year, a quit, and an unexcused absence for
more than five (5) working days without notice.

_)
4

COPY

J.
Hours of Work: The nonnal hours of work for an Officer shall be forty (40) hours
in a work week which shall include a lunch period.
ARTICLE III: RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE PARTIES

A.
It is the intent of the parties that the provisions of this Agreement shall be
applicable to all Police Officers irrespective ofrank, without regard to race, creed, color, religion,
sex, national origin or political affiliation.

B.
The Borough promises and agrees that there shall be no discrimination,
interference, intimidation, restraint or coercion by the Borough or any of its agents against any
member of the Police force because of his/her membership in the collective bargaining unit or
participation in a grievance and/or arbitration process and the Police agree not to engage in any
of the above against any Member of Council and/or its agents.
C.
No Police Officer employed by the Borough waives any of his/her rights,
privileges, or immunities afforded to that Police Officer under the Constitution of the United
States of America or the Commonwealth of PeMsylvania or any laws that flow therefrom.
D.
There shall be no union activity on Borough time, or on Borough property unless
properly requested.

)

E.
There shall be no intimidation or coercion of employees into joining the union or
continuing membership therein.
F.
There shall be no strikes, work stoppages, interruption or impeding of work or
concerted absences from work. No Officer or representative of the union shall authorize,
instigate, aid or condone any such activity.
G.
The applicable procedures of this Agreement shall be followed for the settlement
of all grievances.
H.
No Police Officer shall be required to work or use facilities or equipment provided
by the Borough that are unsafe, hazardous or injurious to the Officer's safety, wellbeing or
welfare. If such a situation arises, the Officer shall report the same to the Chief of Police who
shall act upon the request within forth-eight (48) hours. Should the Chief fail to satisfactorily
resolve the matter, it shall be handled through the grievance procedure.
ARTICLE IV: MANAGEMENT

A.
The Mayor is the administrative head, and has the right to manage, administer and
supervise the Police force, including the right to schedule, assign work and transfer, and with just
cause, the right to suspend or discipline employees in accordance with the provisions of this
Agreement, of the Borough Code, and the Rules and Regulations of the Civil Service
Commission.

_)
5

COPY

B.
The Borough shall have the exclusive right to determine and control the use of
equipment and facilities, and to hire, re-hire, promote, recall, demote, suspend, discharge, or
layoff Police in accordance with the Borough Code and the Rules and Regulations of the Civil
Service Commission and this Agreement.
C.
Rights, privileges, prerogatives or obligations which are not specifically granted
the Police or the union by this Agreement, are retained by the Borough.
D.
All benefits that the Police are currently receiving that are not altered by this
Agreement shall remain in effect.
ARTICLE V: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

A.
The parties hereto, because of entering into this Agreement, fully expect and
intend that the relationship between the parties hereto shall have been fully settled for the term of
the Collective Bargaining Agreement. The parties agree hereby to exercise this Agreement in
good faith and carry out the terms and conditions of this Agreement in the same manner. In the
event that any disputes arise out of the provisions of this Agreement or the interpretation thereof,
such disputes shall be settled by the following grievance and arbitration procedure.
The purpose of the procedure is to secure, at the lowest possible level,
equitable solutions to the problems that may, from time to time, arise
affecting the Police Officer or the Borough as related to the provisions of
this Agreement.

B.

2.

Both parties agree that the proceedings will be kept confidential and as
informal as may be appropriate at any level of the procedure.

3.

Since it is important that the grievance be processed as rapidly as possible,
the number of days indicated at each step should be considered as
maximum. The time limit specified, however, may be extended to a
specific amount of days by mutual agreement, in writing, by both parties.

Defmitions

1.

Complaint: The grievance procedure is not intended to eliminate the
normal dialogue between Officers and supervisors that ordinarily resolve
problems.

2.

A "grievance" is an unresolved complaint by an Officer or group of
officers regarding: (a) the meaning, interpretation, application or
compliance with any provision of this Agreement; or (b) the Borough or
any of its agents acting in an arbitrary or capricious manner contrary to this
Agreement.

_)
6

COPY

C.

Procedure
Step One: Chief

1.

The grievance shall be in writing and filed no later than ten (10) days after
its occurrence with the Chief of Police of the Borough. The Chief of Police
shall answer the grievance, in writing, within seven (7) days of the filing
of said grievance.

2.

If the grievance is directed specifically against the Chief, the Chief of
Police shall answer the grievance, in writing, within two (2) working days
of the fit ing of said grievance.

3.

In the event that the grievant or aggrieved person is not satisfied with the
disposition of the grievance at the first step, or if no decision has been made
in writing by the Chief, they may proceed to Step Two.

Step Two: Mayor

)

1.

The grievance must be filed in writing on a standard grievance form,
signed by the grievant and delivered to the Mayor, with a copy of same to
the Borough Manager, within five (5) days of the date of the Police Chief's
decision.

2.

The Mayor shall meet with the grievant and Chief, if appropriate, to discuss
and endeavor to resolve the difficulty.

3.

The Mayor shall render his/her decision, in writing, and within seven (7)
days of the filing of Step Two, and deliver same to the grievant, with a
copy to the Borough Manager.

4.

If the grievance is directed specifically against the Mayor, the Mayor shall
answer the grievance, in writing, within two (2) working days of the filing
of Step Two.

5.

If the grievance has not been resolved in Step Two, it can be appealed to
Step Three.

6.

If the grievance is against a supervising Officer, including the Chief, said
supervising Officer may also appeal.

Step Three: Council Committee

1.

Within seven (7) days after the answer in Step Two, the grievant shall
notify the Manager of the Borough of the desire to have a hearing
submitting thereto copies of all previous filings and decisions.
7

COPY

D.

2.

The Manager shall forthwith notify the Mayor, President of Council, and
the members of the Public Safety Committee, and arrange for a meeting to
take place as soon as possible, but in no event more than twenty (20) days
from the filing of the appeal.

3.

The Public Safety Committee and such other Council Members as the
President shall appoint, shall meet and hear such pertinent evidence as may
be presented and render a written decision within seven (7) days thereafter.

4.

The decision shall be final unless it requires legal action by Council, in
which case the matter shall be taken up and acted upon at the next Council
meeting.

Choice of Forum

A grievant has a choice of proceeding in accordance with the above procedure or the
appeal procedure provided in the Civil Service Regulations. If the latter choice is selected, it shall
take precedence over and be exclusive of the contract grievance procedure.
E.
The grievance procedure does not preclude any Officer from taking legal action if
there is a justifiable issue to be resolved.

)

ARTICLE VI: LAYOFFS, SUSPENSION AND DISCHARGE

A.
Layoffs or furloughs shall be made pursuant to applicable State and Federal
Statutes and Civil Service Laws.

B.
Re-hiring within three (3) years shall be based on seniority. If at any time within
the three (3) year period, the Borough shall make, in writing, an offer of re-employment to a
furloughed Officer, said Officer shall have twenty (20) days from the date thereof to accept it, in
writing, and if they do not, the provisions of this paragraph shall no longer be available to them.
C.
The Borough shall not demote, suspend, discharge or take any disciplinary action
against an Officer without just cause and without providing him/her with a written statement
giving the reason therefore.
D.
An Officer may appeal such action through the Civil Service Procedure or the
Grievance Procedure beginning at Step Two thereof.
E.
Reprimands - Any record of written or oral reprimands shall be permanently
expunged from an Officer's records after two years of acceptable performance .

.J
8

COPY

F.

)

Police Officers' Bill of Rights
1.

When an anonymous complaint is made against a Police Officer and no
corroborative evidence is obtained the complaint sha11 be classified as
unfounded. All complaints against Police Officers must be made in
writing and signed by the complainant.

2.

When a complaint is filed greater than ninety (90} calendar days after the
date of the alleged event complained of, which if true, could not lead to a
criminal charge, suspension or termination, such complaint shall be
classified as unfounded and the accused Police Officer shall not be
required to submit a written report, but shall be notified orally or in writing
of such claim.

3.

A Police Officer, whether a subject or a witness, must be informed of the
nature of the interrogation twenty-four (24) hours before any interrogation
or interview and the time and date for said interrogation or interview shall
be provided in writing. The Police Officer must appear at the scheduled
interrogation or interview, otherwise, be subject to disciplinary action.

4.

If the interrogated Police Officer writes a written statement, a transcript is
taken, or mechanical record is made, a copy of the same must be given to
the interrogated police officer, without cost, upon request.

)

5.

At the request of any Police Officer under interrogation for a possible
criminal charge, or for charges that could lead to termination or
suspension, the Police Officer shall have the right to be represented by a
counselor or a representative of his/her choice, who shall be present at all
times during the interrogation. The interrogation shall be suspended for a
reasonable time until representation can be obtained.

ARTICLE VII: LONGEVITY INCREMENTS
Each Officer shall receive an annual longevity increment payable in a lump sum on the
anniversary of his/her employment upon completion of the
3 years to 6 years' service
7 years to 11 years' service
12 years to 16 years' service
17 years or over

$250 per year
$500 per year
$750 per year
$1,000 per year

ARTICLE VIII: SHIFT CONTROL
A.
Any Patrolman placed in charge of a shift shall receive compensation equivalent
to the Sergeant's pay for assuming the work, duties and responsibilities of the higher position.

_)
9

COPY

B.
A minimum of four (4) hours duty is necessary for the above extra compensation
to be payable.

)

C.
The Shift Command increments are not made a part of the base rate or considered
as part of the wages for any other purpose.
ARTICLE IX: WITNESS FEES AND COMPENSATION

A.
Witness Fees. An Officer scheduled for duty shall not appear as a witness or
prosecutor in any civil or criminal action before a Common Pleas Court without the permission
of the Chief (providing that if the Officer has been subpoenaed, the Borough secures a release
therefrom), such Officer, when so appearing, shall not be paid any additional money from the
Borough.
B.
Each Officer, when off duty, shall be paid his/her regular day's pay for each day
on which the Officer is required by the Borough to make a County or Federal Court appearance,
except that if the case is postponed, the Officer shall be paid for the time spent with a minimum
of four (4) hours.
C.
When an Officer is so required to make a Grand Jury or a District Attorney
Preliminary Proceeding appearance, the Officer shall be paid for the hours required, with a
minimum of four (4) hours.
D.
Officers attending Common Pleas or Federal Court on a work day shall not be
required to report to duty if they finished Court within two to three hours of the end of their shift.
They shall be paid for these hours.

)

E.
Witness fees or expenses payable for Court appearances shall be retained by
Officer in addition to the Twenty-Five ($25.00) Dollars expenses paid by the Borough.
F.
Each Officer who attends a Magistrate's Hearing on his/her pass day or when off
duty shall be paid at his/her applicable hourly rate with a two hour minimum call-out.
ARTICLE X: UNIFORM ALLOWANCE AND REPLACEMENT

A.

-

)

Uniform Allowance

1.

Each Officer shall be entitled to an annual uniform allowance of $850.00
for the purchase of all uniforms, insignia and equipment required to be
worn or carried on his/her person. Such allowance may be accumulated
for a maximum of two years.

2.

Prior approval of Council shall be and is required for the expenditure of
any such uniform allowance monies.

COPY

)

B.

3.

Each Officer shall receive for each of the years of this Agreement, the sum
of Two Hundred ($200) Dollars for uniform maintenance.

4.

If there is a major uniform change, the Borough will pay for the uniforms
which will not be credited against their uniform allowance.

Replacement
1.

C.

The Borough will provide reasonable reimbursement to a Police Officer
whose personal property is damaged or destroyed while on duty up to a
maximum of One Hundred ($100) Dollars for any item, if such item was
reasonably necessary to the performance of the Officer's duties, except due
to the Officer's own negligence.

Police Sidearms
1.

All Officers will be required to use, while on duty, a Borough issued Glock,
Model 22 with Trijicon night sights/3 high capacity LE magazines.

2.

These weapons will be issued and paid for by the Borough and will remain
the property of the Borough and will be returned to the Borough upon the
Officer's termination of employment.

ARTICLE XI: RESIDENCE AND SCHOOLING
A.
The Officers shall be permitted to live within a fifteen (15) mile air radius from
the Borough's boundary lines.
B.
Newly employed non-resident Officers shall have six (6) months following the
completion of his/her probationary period to establish residence within the fifteen ( 15) mile air
radius from the Borough's boundary lines.
C.
For the term of this Agreement, any practice established in the past pertaining to
Police Schooling shall remain in full force and effect.
D.
If an Officer is required to attend continuing educational classes outside of
Allegheny County, they will be reimbursed for meals, lodging and mileage (based upon the IRS
mileage standards). In the alternative, Police Officers shall have the opportunity to decline
attendance at classes outside Allegheny County if the classes are available within Allegheny
County.
E.
The Borough shall make all reasonable efforts to make continuing education, not
mandated by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, available to all Officers on an equitable basis,
in so far as it does not interfere with the management of the Police Department and its budget.

_J
ll

COPY

ARTICLEXII: INDEMNITY AND LEGAL REPRESENTATION
A.
The Borough agrees to defend and hold harmless any Officer for claims arising
out of the proper performance of his/her duties while working within the course and scope of
his/her employment as a Police Officer of the Borough.
B.

The Borough shall carry and pay for false arrest insurance.

ARTICLEXIII: PRIVATEDUTY
A.
The Borough does not, at the present time, prohibit Officers from engaging in
outside employment, providing such does not interfere with their availability or affect their
efficiency.
B.
Police may moonlight. They should only advise the Chief or Mayor in the event
that their moonlighting required them to perform Police type duties; in this circumstance the Chief
or Mayor may disapprove if the job involves a violation of the provisions of the Police rules
dealing with the integrity of the Police Department.
C.
the borough.

An Officer hired for private functions shall not be considered as an employee of

ARTICLEXIV: VACATION, HOLIDAYAND LEAVE DAYS

)

A.
Except as provided herein, no Officer shall absent himself/herself from work on
account of business or pleasure, unless such Officer shall have the permission to do so from the
Council of the Borough of Crafton. Absence without such permission shall, in all cases, be
considered as a willful violation of the Ordinance, Rules and Regulations of the Borough of
Crafton. Cases of absence not covered by these Rules, shall be presented to the Council for its
formal action thereon.
B.

Vacation
1.

IB-112S6l? ll

Each Police Officer shall be entitled to annual vacation days off with pay
upon completion of continuous employment as follows:
One Year

One Week (i.e. 5 working days)

Two Ye8fs
Seven Years

Two Weeks (i.e. 10 working days)
Three Weeks (i.e. 15 working days)

Twelve Years

Four Weeks (i.e. 20 working days)

Twenty Years

Five Weeks (i.e. 25 working days)

12

----

COPY

2.

Selection of Vacation: Vacation days are to be picked in order of seniority
prior to December 31 st for the following calendar year. Vacation days can
be picked for any dates during the following year subject to the Borough's
right to decide the number of Officers allowed off on vacation during any
given period.
Unless otherwise approved by Council, two (2) weeks of said vacation
shall be taken during the regular vacation period, May through September,
and the t~ird, fourth or fifth weeks when the Borough work schedule
pennits same.
Should an Officer prefer to take their vacation during a time other than the
regular vacation period as described above, they shall secure the Police
Chiefs and Mayor's permission.

)

C.

3.

In the event that the Borough establishes/re-establishes
"Crafton
Celebrates" or some other similar Independence Day celebration, then only
one officer shall be permitted off during the period from June 30 to July 4.

4.

If the employment of an Officer is terminated, he shall be entitled to onetwelfth (1/12) of his/her earned vacation for each month worked in that
year.

5.

The selection and the grant of vacation in one (I) week increments shall
be as heretofore conducted within the Department, provided, however, that
an Officer may elect to take, with at least eight (8) days prior notice, one
(1) week (five days) of his/her vacation entitlement by days. Provided
further, however, that no vacation in daily increments may be elected
during the summer months of June, July and August.

6.

Any Officer who has made his/her vacation selection or scheduled
personal days in accordance with the provisions of the contract, cannot,
without his/her consent, have the scheduled time off subsequently denied,
except for an emergency as determined by management.

7.

All weeks of vacation will be scheduled around the Officer's pass days.
However, officers shall be pennitted to split one (1) week of vacation.

Personal Days, Bonus Payment in Lieu Thereof, ,and Elimination of Holidays
Every Officer shall be entitled to fourteen (14) personal days during the
calendar year. Three (3) of such personal days, an Officer shall be entitled
to take upon eight (8) hours' notice and three (3) of such personal days, an
officer shall be entitled to take on forty-eight (48) hours' notice, provided
that an officer with seniority shall not "bump" an officer with less seniority
who has posted any vacation time or normal bonus day in accordance with

13

COPY

other provisions of the contract. The remaining eight (8) personal days
shall be taken only after one (1) weeks' notice.

)

an officer required to work on any of the following holidays may choose
the payment of double time and one half or payment of time and one half
and the right to keep the officer's bonus day for a worked holiday.
Holidays shall be observed on the date of the holiday commencing at 7
a.m. and shall continue to until 7 a.m. the following day. The eligible
holidays for this option are:
New Year's Day
Presidents' Day
Memorial Day
Independence Day
Labor Day
Veteran's Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day

2.

)

In lieu of electing to take/use all of the vacation days granted in subsection
B above or the personal days granted in sub-paragraph 1 above, an Officer
may elect to receive compensation for up to a total number of fourteen ( 14)
unused personal days or vacation days per year pursuant to the following
terms and conditions:
a.
For the purposes of paying compensation as a bonus for
unused personal days, the days granted shall accrue in the following
manner: the fourteen (14) personal days granted shall be considered to
accrue at two (2) each for the months of January and February, and one ( 1)
for each of the other months.
b.
The bonus shall be payable on or about the first of June or
on or about the first of December, at the election of the Officer, provided,
however, that there shall be filed with the Borough Manager on or before
February 15th, the election of the Officer as to which dates any bonus
payment due him/her shall be made.
c.
There shall be deducted from the amount of any bonus due
the Officer, all personal days taken during the calendar year up do the date
the check is delivered for unused personal days.
d.
Bonus payment for unused personal days shall be at the
Officer's basic rate. An Officer shall be paid for all bonus days taken at
the Officer's basic rate. However, payment for bonus days shall not be
considered as "worked" for over-time calculation.

I B-1~28632
II

14

COPY

e.
Notwithstanding all prior agreements between the parties
hereto, the provisions of these paragraphs are in lieu of the grant of
holidays heretofore by the Borough of Crafton. It is understood and agreed
that the meaning of these provisions is that for the purposes of fixing the
working conditions, etc., all holidays are ignored, and an Officer will work
his/her regular schedule with reference to holidays and shall not be entitled
to either additional holiday pay or additional compensation other than set
forth in these provisions.

)

Without setting forth specific regulations and rules, the members of the
Crafton Police Department agree that in electing to take personal days,
they will do so with due regard for the maintenance of sufficient manpower
for the Department.

D.

Death or Illness of Family

1.

Death - Immediate Family. Whenever an Officer, as herein defined,
shall be absent from his/her employment with the Borough of Crafton
because of a death in the immediate family of said employee, there shall
be no deduction in salary or hourly wage of said employee for an absence
not in excess of four (4) days.

2.

Illness. Whenever an Officer, as herein defined, shall be absent from
his/her employment with the Borough of Crafton because of serious illness
in such Officer's immediate family, there shall be no deduction in salary
or hourly wage of said employee for an absence not in excess of three (3)
days per year. Such absence leave provision as to serious illness shall be
noncumulative.

3.

Death -Near Relative. Whenever an Officer, as defined herein, is absent
because of the death of a near relative, there shall be no deduction in the
salary or hourly wage of said Officer for absence on the day of the funeral.

4.

Defmitions. "Immediate member of the family" is hereby defined as
father, mother, brother, sister, son, daughter, husband, wife, parent-in-law,
or a near relative residing in the same household as the Officer, or any
relative with whom the Officer is at the time of such death making his/her
home. "Near relative" is defined as meaning first cousin, grandfather,
grandmother, aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, brother-in-law or sister-in-law.

)

ARTICLE XV: INJURY, ILLNESS AND INSURANCE
A.

Illness or Injury to Officer-Non-Work
I.

Related

During each calendar year, an Officer who is prevented by illness or injury
from performing his/her duties shall be entitled to receive during each day

15

COPY

of absence by reason of illness, the full salary to which such Officer may
be entitled for a period not in excess of seventeen ( 17) days per calendar
year for Officers employed prior to January 1, 1986 and for a period not in
excess of fifteen (15) days per calendar year for Officers employed after
January 1, 1986, but before January 1, 2010, and for a period not in excess
often (10) days per calendar year for Officers employed on or after January
I, 2010.

)

2.

For Officers hired prior to January 1, 2010, annual sick leave allowance
may be accumulated without limitation.
For Officers hired after January 1, 2010, annual sick leave allowance may
be accumulated to maximum of 150 days.

3.

Any Officer who is absent from his/her employment by reason of illness
for more than three (3) consecutive workdays may be required to provide
a doctor's certificate before payment of sick leave benefits are made to
him/her upon his/her return to work. In the event the Borough shall require
a doctor's certificate, it shall pay to the Officer the sum of Five ($5.00)
Dollars for the doctor's examination.
In the event that the Borough desires to have the Officer examined by a
doctor of its choice, it may do so at its cost, and the Borough shall have the
right to disallow such sick leave payment upon certification by such
examining physician of the Officer's fitness to continue working.

)
4.

Upon leaving active service with the Borough of Crafton, the Borough of
Crafton will pay, at the basic rate, to an Officer or his/her spouse or
beneficiary, an amount equal to one (1) day for each day of accumulated
sick leave with the following maximums for the reason set forth:
a.
Resignation or death with less than ten (10) years of service, a
maximum of thirty (30) days.
b.
Resignation or death with over ten ( 10) years of service, a
maximum of forty (40) days.
c.
Retirement with an immediate pension under the age of 55, a
maximum of fifty-five (55) days.
d.
Retirement with an immediate pension over the age of 55, a
maximum of one hundred ( 100) days.
e.
Retirement with an election of a vested pension, a maximum of
twenty-five (25) days.

16

COPY

)

No payment on account of accumulated sick leave shall be payable to an
Officer who has been discharged for cause or who resigns during a period
of suspension.

5.

B.

In addition to the
compensation heretofore set forth, the Borough of Crafton wilJ pay the full
balance of each monthly premium cost for non-occupational disability,
accident and sickness insurance. Coverage of such insurance shall provide
for a weekly benefit of Three Hundred ($300.00) Dollars which will be
effective and payable only after the fourteenth (14 th) day and continue up
to twenty-six (26) weeks thereafter. This insurance shall be in addition to
the sickness pay above, provided, an Officer has, and uses, his/her
cumulative sick pay. In other words, this benefit shall be available after
all other non-job related illness/injury benefits are exhausted. An Officer
may not collect benefits hereunder on any day(s) that he/she collect sick
pay benefits.

Injury. Job Related
1.

Each Officer injured in the line of duty shall receive full compensation as
provide for in State and Federal Statutes.

2.

No Duplicate Payments. Sums due as a result of Worker's Compensation
shall not be retained by the Officer but promptly endorsed to the Borough.

)
C.

Disability, Accident and Sickness Insurance.

In order to qualify himself/herself for paid absence from regular employment by
reason of the provisions of Section A and B of Article XV, any such Officer,
immediately upon return to work, shall be required to file, in addition to the
doctor's certificate provided for in Section A, a signed statement in writing, on a
form to be furnished by the Borough of Crafton, specifically setting forth the
reason, or reasons, for his/her absence from work. Failure to file such fonn in
proper order shall disqualify the Officer from participating in the benefits provided
for.
Any other time off shall be taken from the vacation time of the Officer unless
otherwise granted by Council.

D.

Medical Insurance
).

The Borough shall pay the cost of the premium, less Officer contribution,
for Municipal Benefit Services MBS PPO 1500 - Prescription Option Plan
to include applicable deductions or a comparable plan as may be changed
by the carrier. Officers shall submit all bills pertaining to their deductibles
to the Borough Office in a timely manner. The Borough agrees to
reimburse such deductibles on behalf of the Offices in a timely manner.
The Borough shall continue to provide $500 in flexible spending account
17

COPY

for each Officer to cover co-pays, prescriptions or other uses as authorized
by the plan.

)

Beginning on January l, 2010 and for each year thereafter on a cumulative
basis, all full-time Police Officers shall be required to pay fifteen percent
(15%) of the annual increase in the cost of health insurance coverage over
the calendar year 2019 rates, at the applicable level (i.e., Individual,
Family, etc.), through pro rata monthly payroll deductions.
Bargaining unit members will make monthly health care contributions at
the following rates in per month 2019: Single - $16.98; Parent/ Child $34.87; Employee / Spouse -- $48.29 and Family - $52.76 plus $35 per
month for dental and vision coverage. For the remaining years of this
contract, employees shall pay the 2019 rates.
Beginning January 1, 2013, all Officers shall also contribute $25.00 per
month to the cost of health insurance coverage, in addition to the 15% of
the annual increase provided for above. For 2013, the additional 2013
contribution shall be prorated and deducted from payroll during the period
between ratification and December 31, 2013.

2.

)

The Borough shall have the right to change the existing health insurance
coverage to a plan and/or carrier which is comparable to the coverage that
is presently being provided. The Union, however, retains the right to
grieve the Borough's determination that the plan and/or carrier is
"comparable," except as indicated in the following paragraph. If the Union
does not agree that a plan and/or carrier selected by the Borough is
"comparable", it will so state, in writing, to the Borough within fourteen
( 14) calendar days of the plan and/or carrier being presented to the Union
by the Borough, or such longer period as mutually agreed to by the parties
in writing. The writing shall specify why the Union believes that the plan
is not comparable. In that event, the Borough may not unilaterally
implement the proposed new plan and/or carrier, however, it may
immediately process the dispute before a neutral arbitrator selected by
contacting the American Arbitration Association and requesting a list of 7
arbitrators who are members of the National Academy of Arbitrators. The
decision of the arbitrator on this "comparable'' issue, shall be issued within
forty-five (45) calendar days of the Union's written notice contesting that
the plan and/or carrier selected by the Borough is "comparable" and shall
be final and binding and will determine if the Borough r is authorized to
implement the new plan and/or carrier.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Agreement, in the event that
the Borough is notified by the insurance carrier that costs for the health
insurance plan will increase to the point where they would exceed the
Cadillac Tax thresholds under the Affordable Care Act, the Borough shall
18

COPY

)

have the right to select a plan or plan design with costs that are below the
Cadillac Tax thresholds. In that event, the Borough shall select the plan or
plan design, which is as nearly comparable to the prior plan as possible
with the caveat that costs shall not exceed the Cadillac Tax thresholds. The
parties further agree that only disputes about cost sharing of newly
implemented plan design changes (i.e. deductibles) shall be processed
under the arbitration procedure set forth in the prior paragraph. In that
event, the only question before the arbitrator shall be how to allocate the
cost of new plan design changes (i.e. deductibles).

)

3.

The Borough will provide to each Officer of the Police Department, Blue
Cross prevailing fee dental coverage and where applicable, spouse and
family coverage. The cost of such coverage will be borne by the Borough
of Crafton except that each member of the Police Department shall pay for
such coverage, the sum of Ten ($10.00) Dollars per month. This
Agreement shall be authorization to the Borough of Crafton to deduct such
amount from the compensation of each Officer so long as dental coverage
is provided by the Borough.

4.

The Borough will provide Vision Insurance to each Officer of the police
department and the cost of such coverage shall be borne by the Borough.

5.

Full-Time Crafton Police Officers who opt out of major medical health
insurance coverage shall receive taxable payments through Crafton
Borough's me §125 Cafeteria Plan, payable in monthly prorated amounts
for each month that coverage is not provided. The monthly amounts for
opting-out of said coverage is as follows:
$400.00 per month for husband and wife coverage
$420.00 per month for family coverage
All Full-time Officers who have access to alternative coverage must
maintain that coverage, unless such alternative coverage is substantially
reduced, becomes substantially more expensive, is no longer available to
the Full-Time Officer, or is eliminated; provided, that if the alternative
source remains "comparable" to the Borough's plan in coverage and price,
then the Full-Time Employee must maintain that coverage. The Full-Time
Officer may opt out at any time, but may return to coverage only during
open enrollment or at such time as the employee can show that he/she will
no longer be covered by a "comparable" policy which justified the FullTime Officer's opt-out in the first place, as described in the preceding
sentence. If the Borough employs spouses, then the non-participating
spouse shall not be eligible for the opt-out benefit. The opt-out plan shall
be subject to any terms or conditions of the healthcare providers and the
Borough shall be entitled to modify or discontinue the opt-out program, at

_)
t8-l22S6)2 I}

19

COPY

any time, in its sole discretion; provided, however, that an Officers's
decision to return to the Borough's coverage due to the Borough modifying
or discontinuing the opt-out program shall take effect immediately.

E.

6.

For Officers retiring on or after January 1, 1988, the Borough shall pay a
retirement bonus on the last day of employment of $2,000.

7.

Officers have permission to participate in the Borough's group Blue
Cross/Blue Shield Health Insurance Plan at the Officer's cost upon
retirement to Medicare age.

Life Insurance

1.

The Borough of Crafton will provide life insurance coverage for Police
Officers of the Department, on active duty, in the amount of Fifty
Thousand ($50,000) Dollars.

2.

The Borough agrees to provide life insurance coverage or a paid up life
insurance policy in the amount of Ten Thousand ($10,000) Dollars for
each member of the Police Department who has been honorably retired
from service.
ARTICLE XVI: PENSION BENEFIT AMENDMENTS

)

Pursuant to the statutory authority of the Borough Code to provide minimum pension
benefits to all full-time Police Officers of the Borough, the Borough of Crafton has agreed to the
following additional pension benefits:
A.

Vesting

Benefits for Police Officers shall vest after the attainment of twelve ( 12) years of service
with the Borough of Crafton. The provision for vesting shall be with Social Security integration
and all other provisions of the pension plan. Further, no Officer shall be entitled to elect the
benefits of a vested pension who has been discharged for cause by the Borough of Crafton.
An Officer who is entitled to the vesting provisions of this paragraph shall have the right
to elect not to retain the vested pension and, in this event, shall have the right to withdraw his/her
contributions, together with interest as heretofore provide in the pension Ordinance. In the event
an Officer elects to retain his/her pension, he/she shall make application to the Social Security
Administration to obtain the then applicable Social Security integration amount in order that the
vested pension amount can be determined.
B.
Effective as of January I, 2002, the provision relating to the social security offset
shall be amended to provide that the offset shall be reduced to 20%. Effective as of January 1,
2003, the provisions relating to the social security offset shall be amended to provide that the

1B42~!63! I;

20

COPY

)

offset shall be reduced to 10%. Effective as of January 1, 2004, the provision relating to the social
security offset shall be amended to provide that the offset shall be reduced to 0%.
C.
Effective January 1, 1986, the pension provided under Ordinances of the Borough
of Crafton pursuant to statutory requirements and regulations, may be elected at age 50 after
twenty-five (25) years of service as a Police Officer with the Borough of Crafton.
D.

Pension Benefit Calculation

A Retiring Officer's pension benefit shall be calculated on the basis of his/her total annual
W-2 compensation (including overtime pay, holiday pay, longevity pay and any other types of
additions to compensation by the Borough for police services rendered, but excluding any single
sum or extraordinary payments made which are not directly attributable to active employment
during the averaging period) rather than his/her basic annual salary and shall be calculated on a
thirty-six (36) month average of such compensation.

E.

Police Pension Plan Contribution

Provided that there shall be no cost to the Borough, the Police bargaining unit members
shall contribute to their pension fund only if such a contribution is necessary to maintain the
actuarial soundness of the fund. In managing the money supplied to it by the Commonwealth for
pension fund contributions, the Borough agrees that it will utilize up to one hundred percent
( 100%) of those state-generated funds which are attributable to the existence of the Borough's
full-time regular Police Officers along with all interest earned and any amortized surpluses from
prior years. Only after one hundred percent (100%) of these monies are contributed to the fund
may the Borough require bargaining unit Police Officers to make fund contributions to insure the
actuarial soundness of the plan.
Should the plan be detennined to be actuarially sound, without utilizing any bargaining
unit Officer contributions, and without the necessity of contributing on hundred percent (100%)
of the state contribution which is attributable to the existence of the regular full-time Police
Officers, then the Borough may utilize any such "excess" without restriction except such
restriction as imposed by law or regulation of a Commonwealth Agency or Agencies enacted
pursuant to law.
F.
It is agreed by the Borough that upon request by the Wage and Policy Unit of the
Police Department, its representatives will meet with the Plan Actuaries, Mockenhaupt Benefits
Group, to determine and thereafter grant any actuarially sound amendment improving benefits to
members if determined by the actuary to be available without cost to the Borough.
G.
Members of the Crafton Police Wage and Policy Unit shall be offered an
opportunity to participate in the Borough's Pension Committee in an advisory capacity.

H.

The parties agree that the pension plan shall be amended to reflect the repeal of
the Act 600 killed-in-service benefit in compliance with Act 51 of 2009.

21

COPY

I. EffectiveJanuary 1, 2020, the Borough and the Wage and Policy Unit agree to the addition
of a Deferred Retirement Option Plan ('·DROP") effective for up to a period of three (3) years.
The specific provisions of the DROP Plan are attached hereto as Exhibit A.

)

ARTICLE XVII: BASIC SALARY

The basic salary for members of the Police Departmentof the Borough of Crafton during
the terms of this Agreement, expressed as an annual rate, shall be as follows:
A.
Officers, upon the attainment of four (4) years of service as a Police Officer with
the Borough of Crafton for the year 2020:
Patrol Officer
Sergeant
Captain

$84,912.17
$88,521.00
$93,243.84

8.
Officers, upon the attainment of four (4) years of service as a Police Officer with
the Borough of Crafton for the year 2021 :
Patrol Officer
Sergeant
Captain

)

$87,459.54
$91,177.00
$96,041.16

C.
Officers, upon the attainment of four (4) years of service as a Police Officer with
the Borough of Crafton for the year 2022:
Patrol Officer
Sergeant
Captain

$90,083.32
$93,913.00
$98,922.39

D.
Officers, upon the attainment of four (4) years of service as a Police Officer with
the Borough of Crafton for the year 2023:
Patrol Officer
Sergeant
Captain

$92,785.82
$96,730.00
$101,890.06

E.
Officers, upon the attainment of four (4) years of service as a Police Officer with
the Borough of Crafton for the year 2024:
Patrol Officer
Sergeant
Captain

$95,569.40
$99,633.00
$104,946.76

F.
Officers with less than four (4) years of service as a Police Officer with the
Borough of Crafton shall receive compensationas follows:
(B,mli6J1 II

22

COPY

l.

For the first year of service, 70% of the Patrolman rate for the applicable
year of service.

2.

For one (1) to two (2) years of service, 80% of the Patrolman rate for the
applicable year of service.

3.

For two (2) to three (3) years of service, 85% of the Patrolman rate for the
applicable year of service.

4.

For three (3) to four (4) years of service, 90% of the Patrolman rate for the
applicable year or service.

ARTICLE XVIII: CALL BACK PAY
A.
An Officer called in prior to his/her regular starting time or required to work past
his/her scheduled quitting time shall be paid straight time for additional hours worked, unless
such additional hours worked are otherwise eligible for overtime pay in accordance with
applicable law.
B.
An Officer ca11edin other than at the beginning or end of his/her regular shift shall
be paid a minimum of two hours except if the call in is for disciplinary reasons.

)

ARTICLE XIX: STATUTORY SAVINGS CLAUSE
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny or restrict any Police Officer of such
rights as he/she may have under Act No. 111 of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, approved
the 24th day of June, 1968; or the Borough Code. Subsection G), known as "Civil Services for
Police and Firemen'' (53 P.S. §46171); or any and all decisions and/or case law applicable to the
above; or other applicable laws or regulations. The right granted to the Police Officers hereunder
shall be deemed to be in addition to those provided elsewhere.

ARTICLE XX: SAVINGS BONDS
The Borough of Crafton will provide for those members of the Police Department
requesting the same, a payroll deduction plan for securing Government Savings Bonds.

ARTICLE XXI: DUES CHECK OFF
Provided the Borough is provided with written individually executed dues check-off
authorizations by the Officers of the Borough, the Borough shall deduct from the pay of each
Officer so providing the Borough with such written authorization the amount of the prevailing
monthly dues established by the Crafton Police Wage and Policy Unit. The dues deducted by the
Borough shall be transmitted to the Crafton Police Wage and Policy Unit monthly.

)
23

COPY

ARTCILEXXII: SCHEDULEING/OVERTIME
A.
Subject to the applicable Wage and Hour regulations of the Federal Government
applicable to Police Officers, time and one-half wilt continue to be paid for hours in excess of
eighty hours in a pay period.
B.
Except in emergency situations the Borough shall, in good faith, attempt to
schedule officers in a manner that no more than 40 hours are worked in any week of a pay period.
The Borough shall likewise, in good faith, attempt to routinely schedule Officers in such a manner
as they will not be required to work more than eight hours in a 24-hour period and to have two
consecutive pass days off. Any Officer who believes that his/her routine or overtime assignments
are not being handled in a good faith manner shall have the right to present the matter to the
Borough Solicitor. If the matter is not resolved between the Officers and the Borough Solicitor,
the Officer shall have the right to grieve such matter to a Local "Arbitration Panel" comprised of
the Borough Solicitor, one Police Officer selected by the Police Department, and a third party
mutually agreed upon by the Solicitor and the Police Officer. The decision of this Arbitration
Panel shall be binding upon all parties. The Arbitrator's fees and expenses shall be shared equally
by the Parties.

C.
I)

Officers shall not work more than 12 hours on a shift unless there is a bona
fide emergency as determined by the Chief of Police that requires an
extension of an officer's shift. Officer must have at least 8 hours off prior
to working next shift including call outs.

2)

Officers will be given five (5) minutes to call back to respond to a call-out.
If the Officer does not response in a timely manner, the next Officer on the
list shall be called.

3)

If an Officer calls off sick with short notice (2 hours or less), Officers
currently working will fill the sick officer's shift.

4)

Shifts shall be filled by the call out list.

5)

If no Officer takes the overtime when contacted, the Officer working the

)

shift prior to and/or the shift after will be required to take the overtime.
6)

The Chief will have control of the schedules as to overtime during the
prime months of June, July and August. Once these schedules are posted
they are subject to the call out list. The Chief will attempt in good faith to
have all scheduled overtime during the prime months of June, July and
August equally distributed.

24

COPY

7)

A copy of this fonn will be left in the Squad Room for Officers to
complete. When completed, this fonn will be provided to the Chief.

D.
If an Officer's scheduled shift is moved with less than 24 hours, that Officer will
receive time and one half compensation only for the time moved (i.e., if the Officer is moved
from his/her scheduled 11pm - 7am shift to the 7pm - 3am shift, he/she will only receive time
and one half compensation from 7pm - 11pm - 4 hours).

ARTICLE XXIII: TRADING SHIFTS
An Officer may elect to trade shifts with another Officer provided that such trade does not
cause the Borough to incur any increased compensation.

ARTICLE XXIV: PHYSCIAL FITNESS
In the event the Borough establishes standards for physical fitness, it shall first meet with
the Police Department and discuss such standards prior to any implementation.

ARTICLE XXV: PERMANENT SCHEDULES

If Officers are assigned permanent work schedules, they may select the same on the basis
of seniority.
ARTICLE XXVI: MODIFICATION
This Agreement shalJ not be modified, in whole or in part, except by an instrument, in
writing, duly executed by both parties or their duly authorized designees or assigns.

25

COPY

ARTICLEXXVIII: LENGTHOF THE AGREEMENT
The term of this Agreement shall begin on January 1, 2020, and shall continue in full force
and effect until midnight, December 31, 2023, and then shall, thereafter, automatically renew for
one (1) year periods unless either party gives written notice to the other in accordance with Act
111 of 1968, of its intention to modify or terminate the Agreement.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, on behalf of the parties hereto, the signators have hereunto set
their hands and seals, the day and year first above written.
DA TE:

------=~~~---h_,-='sh,-~_~
__ __,,
2020
CRA::::LICE
By

By

By

WAGE AND POLICY UNIT

~Vl----

JLL-1<:Z::;J
~l)~;l~

)
Approved and/or ratified by authority of motion made at the regular meeting of Crafton
Borough Council held on the,1'j 111day of

ATTEST:

E'tllltl/l

Y

, 2020.

BOROUGH OF CRAFTON

By~~
President of Council

l&-l?lS6Jl I 1

26

COPY

Exhibit A

\
)

CRAFTON BOROUGH POLICE PENSION

DEFERREDRETIREMENTOPTIONPROGRAM{"DROP"}
Effective January 1, 2020, and following the adoption of an ordinance by Borough Council
consistent with the foregoing, the following DROP provisions shall be added to the Crafton
Borough Police Pension Plan as follows:
Article XIII

Deferred Retirement Option Plan

Section 33-71

Defmitions

DROP - The Deferred Retirement Option Plan created as an optional fonn of benefit

under existing Crafton Borough Police Pension Plan.
Subsidiary DROP Participant Account - A separate, interest bearing, subsidiary DROP

participant account established to accumulate the DROP pension benefit for a DROP participant.

)

Member - A full-time Crafton Borough Police Officer covered by the Plan.
Participant - A police officer who is eligible for nonnal retirement pursuant to the

pension plan and who has elected to participate in the DROP program.
Effective Date of Participation - The day following the effective date of the member's

regular retirement.
Plan - The Crafton Borough Police Pension Plan as it applies to Crafton Borough police

officers.
Section 33-72
(A)

Eligibility.

DROP Provisions

Effective January 1, 2020, members of the Crafton Borough police

officers' bargaining unit that have not retired prior to the implementation of the DROP program,
may enter into the DROP on the first day of any month following the attainment of age 50 and

27

COPY

the completion of 25 or more years of credited service with the Crafton Borough Police
Department.
(B)

Written Election.

An eligible Member of the Plan electing to participate in the DROP

program must complete and execute a "DROP" Election Form prepared by Crafton Borough,
which shall evidence the Member's participation in the DROP program and document the
Participant's rights and obligations under the DROP. The form must be signed and notarized by
the Member and be submitted to the Borough within 30 days of the date on which the Member
wishes the DROP election to be effective. The DROP Election Form shall include an irrevocable
notice to the Borough that the Member shall terminate from employment with the Crafton
Borough Police Department effective on a specific date ("resignation date") no later than thirtysix (36) months from the effective date of the DROP election. An officer shall cease work as a
Crafton Borough Police Officer on the officer's resignation date, unless the Employer terminates

)
or honorably discharges the officer prior to the resignation date. In addition, all retirement
documents required by the Police Pension Plan Administrator must be filed and presented to the
Borough for approval of retirement and commencement of the monthly pension benefit. Once
the retirementapplication has been approved by the Police Pension Administrator, it shall become
irrevocable.
After a Member enters the DROP program, contributions to the pension plan by the
Participant and the Borough on behalf of the participantwill cease, and the amount of the monthly
benefits will be frozen.
Members shall be advised to consult a Tax Advisor, of their choice, prior to considering
the DROP program, as there may be serious tax implicationsand/or consequences to participating
in the DROP program.

28

COPY

(C)

Limitation on Pension Accrual.

After the effective date of the DROP election, the

Participant shall no longer earn or accrue additional years of continuous service for pension
purposes.
(D)

Benefit Calculation.

For all Plan purposes, continuous service of a Member

participating in the DROP program shall remain as it existed on the effective date of
commencement of participation in the DROP program.

Service thereafter shall not be

reorganized or used for the calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the Plan. The
average monthly compensation of the Member for pension calculation purposes shall remain as
it existed on the effective date of commencement of participation in the DROP program.
(E)

Payments to the DROP Account.

The monthly retirement benefits that would have

been payable had the member elected to cease employment and receive a normal retirement
benefit shall, upon the Member commencing participation in the DROP program, be credited on

)
the first day of each month into a separate subsidiary DROP participant ledger account established
to track and accumulate the Participant's monthly pension benefits. This account shall be
designated the Subsidiary DROP Participant Account. The account shall be managed by the
Borough pursuant to the same fiduciary obligations and principles applicable to management of
the municipal pension plans.
(F)

Early Termination.

A Participant may change the DROP tennination date to an earlier

date and thereby effectuate a complete termination from service. No penalty shall be imposed
for early termination of DROP participation. Participation in the DROP does not guarantee the
DROP participant's employment during the period specified for DROP participation.

It is

recognized that the Participant shall not be permitted to make any withdrawals from the DROP
Account until DROP participation has ended.

29

COPY

(G)

)

Payout.

Upon the tennination date set forth in the DROP Election Form or on such

date as the Participant withdraws or is terminated from the DROP program, if earlier, the
terminating DROP participant, or if deceased, the participarit's survivor or named beneficiary,
shall elect a method of receiving payment of the DROP benefits. Distribution, regardless of the
method specified, shall be made within forty-five (45) days following the actual termination of a
Participant's employment with the Crafton Borough Police Department. The following options
for distribution shall be available to and selected on the approved from by the Participant,
Participant's survivor or beneficiary: (1) the accumulated balance in the Subsidiary DROP
Participant Account shall be paid to the Participant (of the Participant's survivor or named
beneficiary) in a single lump-sum payment less withholding taxes; or (2) as a direct rollover to
an eligible retirement plan as defined in section 402(c)(8)(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986; or, in the case of an eligible retirement plan that is an individual retirement annuity as

)

described in section 402(c)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.

If the Participant,

Participant's survivor or beneficiary fails to elect a method of payment within sixty (60) days
after the Participant's termination date, the Borough shall pay the balance as a lump sum. If the
Participant selects a rollover option, he or she must submit all appropriate paperwork from the
IRA custodian within the required election period.
Following termination of DROP participation, the subsequently paid normal retirement
benefits payable to the Participant, Participant's survivor or the Participant's beneficiary no
longer shall be credited to the DROP Account but shall be distributed monthly pursuant to normal
retirement plan rules.

IB-1?2S6H11

30

COPY

(H)

Disability During DROP.

If a Participant becomes eligible for a disability pension

benefit and terminates employment, the monthly normal retirement benefit to the DROP
Participant shall terminate.
(I)

If a Participant dies before the DROP Account balance is paid, the

Death.

Participant's surviving spouse or beneficiary shall have the same rights as the Participant to
withdraw the DROP Account balance. The monthly benefit credited to the Participant's DROP
Account during the month of the Participant's death shall be the final monthly benefit for DROP
participation.

In addition, the DROP Participant's survivor shall be eligible to receive the

retirement system death benefits normally payable in the event of the death of retired employee.
(J)

Eligibility for other Benefits. In accordance with the provisions of the Act No. 44 of

2009, 53 P.S. §895.1101-895.1131, a DROP Participant shall be eligible for all pre-retirement
benefits for employees provided by law, including but not limited to the Workers' Compensation

)

Act, Public Safety Officers' Benefit Act of 1976, etc.
(K)

Amendment.

Any amendments to the DROP Ordinance shall be consistent with the

provisions covering deferred retirement option plans set forth in any applicable collective
bargaining agreement or state or federal law, and shall be binding upon all future Participants and
upon all Participants who have balances in their DROP Accounts.

31

