AGREEMENT BETWEEN

Teamsters Local Union No. 205
Representing the

Township of Elizabeth Police Department
and

The Township of Elizabeth
JANUARY 1, 2018-DECEMBER 31, 2021

Table of Contents
ARTICLE NO. I- INTENT ............................................................................................................

1

ARTICLE NO. II - WAGES ...........................................................................................................

2

ARTICLE NO. III- WORK WEEK AND OTHER WAGE REGULATIONS ............................. 3
ARTICLE NO. IV -LONGEVITY
ARTICLE NO. V -MAGISTRATE
ARTICLE NO. VI-HOLIDAYS

................................................................................................

HEARINGS AND COURT APPEARANCES ................... .4
...................................................................................................

ARTICLE NO. VII-PERSONAL

4

5

DAYS ...................................................................................... 5

ARTICLE NO. VIII- VACATIONS ..............................................................................................

6

ARTICLE NO. IX- UNIFORM ALLOWANCE ........................................................................... 6
ARTICLE NO. X- BEREAVEMENT PAY ................................................................................... 7
ARTICLE NO. XI-SCHOOLS

& TRAINING CLASSES ............................................................ 7

ARTICLE NO. XII- INSURANCE BENEFITS ............................................................................ 8
ARTICLE NO. XIII- SICK LEAVE ............................................................................................

12

ARTICLE NO. XIV - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE ................................................................... 12
ARTICLE NO. XV -JURY DUTY ..............................................................................................

13

ARTICLE NO. XVI- POLICE PENSION FUND CONTRIBUTIONS ...................................... 14
ARTICLE NO. XVII-POLICE

PENSION FUND IMPROVEMENTS ..................................... 14

ARTICLE NO. XVIII- PREVIOUS BENEFITS RETAINED ................................................... .14
ARTICLE NO. XIX - MANAGEMENT RIGHTS ...................................................................... 14
ARTICLE NO. XX- STIPULATION ..........................................................................................
ARTICLE NO. XXI-SEPARABILITY

15

AND SAVINGS CLAUSE .......................................... 15

ARTICLE NO. XXII- MISCELLANEOUS ............................................................................... .15
ARTICLE NO. XXIII-TERM

OF AGREEMENT ..................................................................... 16

EXHIBIT A ...................................................................................................................................
Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy ...............................................................................................
EXHIBIT B ....................................................................................................................................
Summary of Health Care Benefits .............................................................................................

17
17
19
19

AGREEMENT

MADE AND ENTERED INTO this _____
, 2017, by and between the TOWNSHIP OF
ELIZABETH, a municipal corporation, organized and existing under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (hereinafter called "Township"),
and
TEAMSTERS LOCAL UNION NO. 205, representing the Police Officers of the Township of
Elizabeth (hereinafter called "Union").
RECOGNITION

The Township hereby recognizes the Union as the sole and exclusive bargaining representative
for wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment pursuant to the Certification of
Representation by the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Act and Act 111 of 1968, in Case No. PFU-98-113-W, issued in 1998, for all full-time police officers and excluding the Chief of Police,
and any other management-level employee.
Maintenance of Membership - All Police Officers who are members of the Union as of the date
of this Agreement, and all Police Officers who hereafter become members of the Union, shall, as
a condition of employment, maintain their membership in good standing in the Union for the
duration of this Agreement. Failure of any such person to maintain his membership in good
standing as required herein shall, upon written notice to the Township and the Police Officer by
the Union to such effect, obligate to Township to discharge such person. A Police Officer who
joins the Union may resign from the Union during a period of fifteen (15) days prior to the
expiration of this Agreement. Such resignation must be in writing and must be mailed to the
headquarters of the Union with a copy to the Secretary of the Township. All Police Officers who
do not become Union members after January 1, 1997, shall as a condition of employment pay to
the Union each month, a service charge as a contribution toward administration of this
Agreement, an amount equal to eighty percent (80%) of the regular monthly dues and
assessments of the Union. Upon failure of the Police Officer to pay the service charge, the
Township shall discharge the Police Officer upon written notice to the Township and the Police
Officer by the Union.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual promises herein contained, the parties
hereto agree as follows:
ARTICLE NO. I - INTENT

It is the intent and purpose of the parties hereto that this Agreement shall cover all matters
related to wages, salaries, hours, fringe benefits, grievance and working conditions which, by law
or otherwise, municipal Police Officers are now, or may be hereafter, entitled to bargain. for,
individually or collectively with their municipal employer.

I

ARTICLE NO. H - WAGES
A. For wage purposes, patrolmen shall be classified as Class A, Class B, Class C, Class D, and
Class E, and shall be paid the wage set forth herein for those respective classes. All future
patrolmen shall be hired to the force as Class E patrolmen and shall be paid the rate provided
for the same.
B. After one year of service as a Class E patrolman, a Class E patrolman will move to the rank
of Class D patrolman.
C. After eighteen months (1 ½ years) of service as a Class D patrolman, a Class D patrolman
will move to the rank of Class C patrolman.
D. After one year of service as a Class C patrolman, a Class C patrolman. will move to the rank
of Class B patrolman.
E. After one year of service as a Class B patrolman, a Class B patrolman will move to the rank
of Class A patrolman.
F. The schedule of salaries for the calendar years 2018-2021 are as follows:

ANNUAL AND HOURLY RATES
CLASS
Lieutenant
Yearly
Sergeant
Yearly
Class A
Yearly
Class B
Yearly
Class C
Yearly
Class D
Yearly
Class E
Yearly

1-1-2018

1-1-2019

1-1-2020

1-1-2021

$40.43

$41.64

$42.79

$43.96

$84,089.20

$86,611.88

$88,993.71

$91,441.04

$35.21

$36.27

$37.26

$38.29

$73,228.88

$75,425.75

$77,499.96

$79,631.21

$34.02

$35.04

$36.00

$37.00

$70,763.47

$72,886.37

$74,890.75

$76,950.25

$33.18

$34.18

$35.12

$36.08

$69,006.70

$71,076.90

$73,031.51

$75,039.88

$32.98

$33.97

$34.90

$35.86

$68,599.65

$70,657.64

$72,600.72

$74,597.24

$26.80

$27.60

$28.36

$29.14

$55,745.25

$57,417.61

$58,996.59

$60,619.00

$22.33

$23.00

$23.62

$24.28

$46,447.23

$47,840.65

$49,156.27

$50,508.07

2

G. Township will provide, where possible, officer's paychecks at the completion of the 11 :00
p.m. to 7:00 a.m. tum but will not be responsible for bank's failure to deliver checks to the
Township.

ARTICLE NO. ID-WORKWEEK

AND OTHER WAGE REGULATIONS

A. All Police Officers shall work a forty (40) hour work week, consisting of five (5) eight (8)
hour days.
B. 1. All Police Officers shall be paid time and one-half (1 ½) for all hours worked in excess of
eight (8) hours in any work day or in excess of forty (40) hours during any work week;
2. Any Police Officer called back to work after completing his scheduled tour of duty,
called out prior to the start of his tour of duty, or called back to wotk on an off day, shall
be guaranteed a minimum of four (4) h urs of work, payable at time and one-half (1 ½).
If the assignment is completed before the four (4) hours have elapsed the officer will be
required to retw11 to the Department or notify his/her supervi or so that other work may
be assigned during the remaining time allotment. In no circumstances may the officer be
reliev,ed from duty and paid for the remaining call out time.
3. If during the Monday - Friday daylight shift a call out is required, the Chief of Police
may perform bargaining unit work for a time period not to exceed three (3) hours in lieu
of the call out.
C. Police Officers who work the 3:00 p.m. to 11 :00 p.m. shift and the 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
shift shall receive. the following shift differential pay in addition to their regular pay:
During 2015, 2016, 2017
Shift from 3 :00 p.m. to 11 :00 p.m. - .55 cents per hour
Shift from 11 :00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. - .55 cents per hour
D. The Township shall maintain a record of overtime hours worked by employees subject to the
following limitations: All employees shall be given the opportunity to work overtime over a
reasonable period of time. As overtime rosters are established in accordance with this
provision, senior employees will be placed at the top of the list effective January 1 of each
calendar year and thereafter overtime will be distributed on a round-robin basis. Ultimately,
however, the objective will be to equalize opportunity within a period of time betwee~ the
employees who normally perfonn the job.
The preceding, not withstanding, it is recognized that where a job is in progress, the most
practical manner of assigning overtime will be to hold over qualified employees who are
working on the shift that precedes the overtime. In such a situation, the above r~ferred to
roster would be consulted to determine which of the qualified employees would be held over
from the preceding shift to perform this overtime work.
Other situations might occur in which the Township may have to hold employees over (or in
which a sufficient number of employees cannot be held over and some additional employees
must be called in) and when this occurs, the above referenced to roster will be consulted to
determine which of the qualified employees shall be called in.
3

Overtime hours declined shall be counted as overtime hours worked for purposes of overtime
distribution. Overtime hours shall not be pyramided.
It is understood and agreed that the Township retains discretion to determine the number of
employees, if any that shall be used on overtime. Moreover, nothing in this Article is
intended to restrict the Township's right to limit work assignments to qualified employees.

E. Overtime pay shall be paid on the regular payday for the period in which the overtime is
worked.
F. The Township will schedule a minimum of two (2) officers to a turn. The Township shall
likewise post a monthly schedule at least four (4) weeks in advance of the scheduled period.
It is understood that the Township may change the posted schedule in emergency or other
unforeseen circumstances.
G. During any shift in which there is no sergeant on duty, the most senior (seniority basis)
patrolman on duty will be paid at a rate equal to that of sergeant. However, this section shall
not be applicable during any shift in which the Chief of Police or Lieutenant was on duty and
would, by virtue of his position, be considered the Officer in Charge.
H. The work week shall start at 12:01 a.m. Sunday and shall end the following Saturday at
Midnight.

I. Any Extra Duty Details consisting of any requested services outside of the normally
scheduled work week shall be paid at one and one half (1 ½) times the rate of the current
highest paid active position. This section encompasses requests from outside agencies such
as government entities, companies and citizens who will reimburse Elizabeth Township the
costs for such officer's wages and an administrative fee assessed by the Township. (School
details and Traffic details are examples but are not all inclusive to this section).
J. Whenever Police Officers are transporting prisoners, it shall be the discretion of the Officerin-Charge to determine whether one (1) or two (2) officers are involved in the transport.

ARTICLE NO. IV - LONGEVITY
In addition to their base annual salaries, all Township Police Officers having completed four (4)
or more years of service shall receive the following percentage longevity pay:
quarter percent (0.25%) of base annual salary after four (4) years of service and an additional
quarter percent (0.25%) of base annual salary for each year of service above five (5) years of
service to a maximum of five percent (5%) of base annual salary after twenty-four (24) years or
more years of service.

ARTICLE NO. V -MAGISTRATE HEARINGS AND COURT APPEARANCES
Police Officers who are scheduled to attend Magistrate Hearings during their off-duty time shall
be compensated at the rate of time and one-half their regular straight time hourly rate for all time

4

they are in attendance at Magistrate Hearings, with a minimum guarantee of two (2) hours' pay
for each occasion.
Police Officers who are scheduled to appear and actually appear in the Court of Common Pleas
during their off-duty time shall be compensated at the rate of time and one-half their regular
sh·aight time hourly rate for all time they are in attendance at ourt plus trav I time from and to
the Township Municipal Building. Officers will be paid a mioirnmn g·uarantee of three (3)
hours. Once the jury is charged and released to deliberate, police officers attending Court will
either ·return to the Department or notify their immediate supervisor that they are no longer onduty.
Payment for attendance at either a Magistrate Hearing or in Court shall only be provided when
the officer has verified twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the hearing/court appearance that
the matter has not been cancelled or rescheduled. If the police officer has not obtained such
verification, he will forfeit compensation if he appears at a Magistrate Hearing or in Court when
the matter has been cancelled or rescheduled more than twenty four (24) hours in advance.

ARTICLE NO. VI - HOLIDAYS
A. All Police Officers shall have the following paid legal holidays:
Thanksgiving Day (Actual Day)
Day after Thanksgiving (Actual Day)
Christmas Eve (Dec. 24)
Christmas Day (Dec. 25)
New Year's Eve (Dec. 31)

New Year's Day (Jan. 1)
Easter Sunday (Observed)
Memorial Day (Observed)
Independence Day (July 4)
Labor Day (Observed)
Veteran's Day (Observed)

B. If a Police Officer is assigned and works on a holiday, he shall be paid double time and a one
half (2 ½) for such work.

An officer who works a shift that ends on a day designated as a holiday in Section A may be
compensated at time and one half (1 ½) his/her hourly rate and be entitled to receive a
deferred holiday to be used in the future with approval of the Chief of Police or his/her
designee in lieu of receiving holiday pay.
C. If a holiday occurs during a Police Officer's vacation period, such Police Officer shall
receive an additional paid day off.
D. In order to be eligible for holiday pay as provided for in this Article, the Police Officer must
work his/her regularly scheduled workday immediately prior to said holiday and his/her
regularly scheduled workday after said holiday, unless he/she is absent because of death in
the family, hospitalization (being admitted), occupational injury, or jury duty.

ARTICLE NO. VII - PERSONAL DAYS
Employees shall receive three (3) personal days per calendar year. It is contractually understood
that except in cases of stated emergency, the personal days shall not be taken except at a prior
5

requested time and that mutual management consideration shall be a factor in scheduling the
days. If more than one 1) officer should apply for the same personal day, seniority shall
determine which officer will be allowed to take the day off
·

ARTICLE

0. VIII - VA CATIONS

A. All Police Officers shall be entitled to a vacation according to the following schedule:
After
After
After
After
After
After

One week
Two weeks
Three weeks
Four weeks
Five weeks
Six weeks

one year
two year
five years
ten years
eighteen years
twenty-five years

B. Selection on the vacation schedule by Police Department personnel shall be made on a
seniority basis. Officer entitled to more than one (1) week of vacation may split one week (5
days) into single days. Officers entitled to three (3) or more weeks of vacation may split two
(2) weeks (10 days) into single days; however an officer electing to split the second week
will be precluded from scheduling the second week of single days until all other officers have
selected their vacation time off in accordance with the established procedure. With the
exception of the one or two single day option, all other vacation must be scheduled in
increments of five (5) vacation days. Such splitting may occur only when minimum of one
(1) week's notice of such splitting is given to the Township -and no more than one other
officer is on vacation at the time of taking such split vacation. Police Officers will be
prohibited from scheduling a single vacation day on a holiday or personal day.
C. One week's vacation shall consist of five (5) working days off. Vacation shall be scheduled
so that a Police Officer's vacation shall start immediately after said officer's scheduled two
(2) consecutive days off. When possible, the Township shall adjust schedules to allow Police
Officers two (2) consecutive days off after the five (5) working days. Management concurs
in this procedure but cannot guarantee its total viability. However, the Township will
guarantee one (1) day off after five (5) days of vacation and will attempt to schedule two (2)
days off after the five (5) days of vacation but cannot guarantee the two (2) days.

ARTICLE NO. IX- UNIFORM ALLOWANCE
A. Any new member of the Police Department shall receive one (1) complete uniform provided
by the Township.

B. In addition thereto, each member of the Police Department shall receive a uniform allowance
of seven hundred dollars ($700.00) for each calendar year of this Agreement. However, the
Police Officer must present a uniform purchase order to receive the allowance. Payment of
the uniform purchases shall be made by the Township within ten (10) days of receipt of the
invoice. Any officer hired after June 30 in each year shall receive one-half (1/2) of the
uniform allowance and any officer hired prior to June 30 in each year shall receive a full
uniform allowance.

6

1.

The uniform allowance may also be used for the dry cleaning of uniforms.

C. In the event the Board of Commissioners decides to change officers uniforms, the cost of said
replacement shall be paid by the Township.
D. Body Armor sball be replaced at the discretion of the Township in consideration of the
manufacturer's warranty. The cost to the Township of said replacement shall be capped at
nine hundred dollars ($900.00) within a five (5) year period. Any additional costs associated
with the procurement of body armor may be paid out of the police officer's annual uniform
allowance.
E. The Township shall designate authorized or approved Township vendors from whom the
uniform items must be purchased, provided the same are available within fourteen (14) days
.of the request by the officer.
F. The Township agrees to pay for uniform items damaged on duty including prescription
eyewear (glasses and contact lenses).
G. Uniform allowance may be used for the purchase of firearms only to the extent that the
firearms purchased using the uniform allowance are those with which a Police Officer will
qualify for use while on duty.
·

ARTICLE NO. X - BEREAVEMENT PAY
A. In the event of a death in an officer's immediate family, such officer shall receive no more
than four (4) days off with pay. Such days shall be the day of the funeral and three (3)
preceding days.
These days must be the officer's normally scheduled work days.
"Immediate family" is defined as parents, children, spouse, brother, sister, mother-in-law,
father-in-law and significant other. "Significant other" shall be defined as "An individual
who resides in the same residence with the Police Officer and with whom the Police Officer
has been in a committed, romantic relationship for a substantial period of time."

B. In the event of the death of a grandparent or grandparent-in-law, the officer shall have the
day of the funeral off, with pay, if such day would otherwise have been the officer's
scheduled work day.
ARTICLE NO; XI - SCHOOLS & TRAINING CLASSES
A. When an officer attends a mandatory training class ordered by the Police Chief, he shall
receive time and one-half for hours worked over forty (40) hours.
B. When an officer is ordered to attend school, he shall be permitted to use Township vehicles
for transportation. If Township transportation is not available, he will be paid the currently
allowable Internal Revenue Service mileage reimbursement rate to personally provide other
suitable transportation. Officers shall not be paid for travel to and from training except as
may be required by law. In addition, he shall be furnished accredited books or money to buy
same, as well as money to buy necessary supplies.

7

C. Officers shall be reimbursed ten dollars ($10.00) per day for meals while attending school
outside the geographical boundaries of the Township, unless meals are an integral part of the
cost of the tuition for the school.
D. In the case of training classes selected by the officer and approved by the Township for
attendance Township shall pay for tuition, supplies and books required for college classes
according to the following conditions after the course is completed and passed. Officers
attencling in person or participating via an internet class shall be reimbursed one hundred
per ent (100%) of expense upon completion of the course with an "A"; seventy-five percent
(75%) reimbursed upon completion of the course with a "B"; and Officers shall receive no
reimbursement for any grades below a "B".
In all situations, books and supplies shall
become the property of the Township whether the course is mandatory or voluntary on the
part of the officer. Notwithstanding, however, these books, where practical, shall be
available for officer reference.
ARTICLE NO. XII - INSURANCE BENEFITS
A. Police Officers shall receive the following insurance benefits set forth below, paid fully by
the Township. The coverage to be provided is as follows:
1. All full-time employees shall, at the employee's request, be covered under the
Township's hospitalization plan, as summarized in Exhibit B (Summary of Benefits PPO
Blue $250/$500), For the year 2018, the employee shall contribute two and a quarter
percent (2.25%) of the employee's base pay toward the medical premium and the
remainder shall be paid by the Township. For the year 2019, the emplpyee shall
contribute two and a half percent (2.50%). For the year 2020, the employee shall
contribute two and three quarter percent (2.75%). For the year 2021, the employee shall
contribute three per cent (3%) of the employee's base pay. Any deductible or co-pay
described in the Summary of Benefits Form (PPO Blue $250/$500) will be paid by the
employee.

The Township shall have the right to change the ex1stmg medical, surgical, and
hospitalization insurance plan, which is comparable to the coverage which is presently
being provided. The Union, however, retains the right to grieve the Township's
determination that the plan is comparable. If the Union does not agree that a plan
selected by the Township is comparable it will so state, in writing, to the Township
within fourteen (14) days of the plan being provided to the Union by the Township, or
such longer period as mutually agreed to by the parties. In that event, the-Township may
not unilaterally implement the proposed new plan, however, it may immediately process
the dispute before a neutral arbitrator selected pursuant to the arbitration step of the
grievance procedure. The decision of the arbitrator on this comparability issue shall be
issued within forty-five (45) calendar days of the Union's written notice contesting that
the plan selected by the Township is comparable and shall be final and binding and will
determine if the Township is authorized to implement a new plan.
The prior practice of reimbursing police officers for prescriptions (including but not
limited to co-pays) will be eliminated.

8

2. Either party may reopen the contract and go to expedited interest arbitration whenever
health care costs are projected to exceed the limits under the law for the imposition of the
excise tax (or "Cadillac tax"). Any such arbitration shall be designed so that it is the
arbitrator's express duty to award such health care benefits that are below the limits of
an l not subject to the Cadillac tax. The selection of the neutral arbitrator and the decision
f the arbitrator shall be processed in the same manner and within the same timeframe as
provided in Article XII, Section A(l)(b), above.
3.

The Township agrees to provide and pay for the Dental and Eye Care Program under
the Employer-Teamsters Local 205 Welfare Fund for the employees and their
dependents. Total cost to be paid for by the Township.

4

Life Insurance - Term life insurance of $50,000.00 while actively employed; A.D.D. $50,000. Upon retirement an officer shall receive $20,000 of life insurance at no cost
to the officer.
·

5.

This provision of the Collective Bargaining Agreement supersedes any and all
inconsistent or conflicting language of the Collective Bargaining Agreement between
the Parties. Similarly, this provision supersedes any past practice which is inconsistent
or which conflicts with it. This provision is to be interpreted liberally so as to ensure
that it accomplishes its objective. The Parties recognize the reality that certain third
parties (for example, insurance carriers, group plans, and/or the legislatures) have the
ability to unilaterally make changes to the health insurance arrangements being
provided to the employees under the Collective Bargaining Agreement. These changes
potentially include, but are not limited to, changes to plans, elimination of plans,
changes to the available medical procedures (such as in-patient drug and alcohol
treatment) and/or number of treatments available during a particular time period,
changes in available health care providers (such as hospitals or clinics) and/or health
care professionals (such as physicians or physical therapists) changes to co-pays and/or
deductibles, and elimination of insurance plan options (such as traditional/indemnity or
point of service). In addition, the changes potentially include, but are not limited to,
changes in record-keeping requirements and procedures, point-of-service and precertification rules, and in-network/out-of-network rules. The Parties agree that the
Township is not a guarantor of health insurance plans or any components of those plans
being provided the employees under this Agreement and that the Township has not
agreed to self-insure any aspect of those plans or the components of those plans should
they be modified in whole or in part or eliminated. This negotiated understanding
applies to all forms of health insurance that are the subject of this Collective Bargaining
Agreement.
The Township has a responsibility to timely pass on to the Union written notice
received by the Township from the carrier and/or group plan of changes to the existing
health plans as more thoroughly detailed above. If an insurance plan is to be eliminated
or changed as substantially as to the available hospitals and/or physicians as to mean de
facto elimination, the Township shall have the responsibility to act in good faith to
change the employees to a new plan and/or carrier, which is comparable to the coverage
presently being provided and which costs the same or less than such coverage. The term
"comparable" does not mean equal to or equivalent, but that which is reasonably
9

available. The Union retains the right to grieve the Township's determination that the
plan and/or carrier is "comparable" as provided in Section A (1).
B. The Township shall provide for Sick and Accident Benefits in the amount of fifty percent
(50%) of an Officer's base salary for a twenty-six week period. The sick and accident
benefits will apply after the employee has utilized his other accumulated siek leave time.

c. Effective January 1, 2008 the Township agrees to increase existing long-term disability
benefits to 66 2/3% of an Officer's base salary.
D. Township shall provide Police Officers with a single concise statement as to the types of
insurance coverage for each Police Officer of the Township.
E. False Arrest - Police Officers shall receive insurance against charges of false arrest in the
following amounts:
$1,000,000 in respect to any one claimant for any one incident, including all claims expenses.
$1,000,000 in respect to any one incident involving more than one claimant and subject to
the aforesaid limits and for any one incident, including all claims expense.
$1,000,000 - Aggregate limit for all claims occurring during any policy period, including all
claims expenses fro~ all incidents.
F. Police Officers who retire subsequent to December 31, 1996, shall be provided with health
insurance (including dental and vision) for the retired member at the same level as at the time
of retirement until Medicare comes into effect. Police officers hired after January 1, 2009,
will not be eligible to receive post-retirement health care benefits.
Eligible employees who retire after the execution of this Agreement shall be required to pay
a flat monthly fee of seventy-five ($75.00) dollars to the Township for their post-retirement
health care benefits.
In addition, the retiree shall be entitled to receive the foregoing post-retirement health
insurance benefits for his spouse, if any, for a period no greater than five (5) years froni the
date of the officer's retirement, or Medicare eligibility of the officer, whichever conies first.
Said benefits shall include the provisions with respect to coverage with another employer as
delineated in the last paragraph of this Article XI, Insurance Benefits. The cost associated
with the spousal health insurance coverage shall be split evenly between the Township and
the retiree. During the period that a retired officer's spouse might be entitled to health
insurance benefits under the terms of.the Agreement, if the retired officer's spouse is eligible
to receive health care benefits from ariy other source (regardless of cost or plan design), the
spouse must forego health care benefits provided under the Township's plan.
Additionally, the Police Officer shall be permitted to elect to have his dependents, other than
his spouse, remain in the Township's group insurance plans; but a Police Officer who so
elects such option shall pay the applicable premiums for such insurance coverage.

10

If a retired Police Officer obtains employment with an employer who provides comparable
health, dental and eye insurance benefits at no cost to the retired officer, the retired officer
shaU n tify the Township of uch employment and not continue in the Township's insurance
plans. In the event the retired Officer fails to notify the Township of such employment he
shall be smcharged for the amount of th premium paid by the Township for bis coverage
during such employment. If the retired Officer's employment thereafter terminates, he shall
be entitled to return to the Township's Health, Dental and Eye Insurance Plans immediately,
with all costs being paid for by the Township.
G. Waiver of Health Insurance
If an employee covered under this agreement is married to an individual who has health
insurance coverage through an employer other than the Township, the Township employee
may waive health insurance coverage through the Township. If the employee covered under
this agreement does not receive health insurance coverage through the Township, he/she may
enroll in the waiver program.
The Township will only accept a waiver of health insurance coverage if the employee
provides proof that he/she is enrolled in another health insurance plan. Acceptable proof will
be an enrollment card with the subscriber's name, identification number and group number.
The Township reserves the right to verify that the employee is enrolled in another health
insurance plan.
An employee will be able to waive his/her health insurance coverage during the annual open
enrollment period or within the timeframe permitted following the occurrence of a qualifying
event as provided under the terms of the health care insurance plan.
Within the timeframe permitted following the occurrence of a qualifying event as provided
under the terms of the health care insurance plan, the employee must provide the Township
with written notice of such change. An employee will only be permitted to re-enroll in the
Township's health insurance program if such a change causes the employee waiving health
insurance coverage to lose his or her other health insurance coverage. Re-enrollment into the
Township's health insurance program will be effective so as to prevent a lapse in coverage.
The Township will require proof that life and family status change has occurred.
In exchange for waiving health insurance coverage through the Township, the employee will
receive taxable compensation in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500), payable in equal monthly installments over the course of a year. Such payments
shall only be made during the time that the employee has effectively waived and does not
receive health insurance coverage through the Township.
H. Teamsters Legal Defense Fund
The employer shall provide and pay the full cost of the Teamsters Legal Defense Fund for all
officers, a criminal and civil defense insurance. The current cost of the benefit is $86.88
annually per officer.

11

ARTICLE NO. XIII - SICK LEAVE
A. Police Officers, after one (1) year of seivice, shall be entitled to ten (10) days sick leave in
any one calendar year, which may be accumulated up to one hundred (100) days. A doctor's
certification is required for an absence from work due to sickness for three (3) or more
consecutive days. For absences of less than three (3) days, a doctor's certificate may be
required where the Township has reason to believe that the employee has been abusing the
sick leave privilege.
B. Any sick days accumulated over one hundred (100) days shall be considered for conversion

to personal days, that is one (1) personal day for each two (2) sick days accumulated over one
hundred (100). These additional personal days will be governed by the rules as set forth in
Article VI, Section B herein.
C. A Police Officer may elect to have the Township compensate him for his accumulated sick
days over one hundred days at the rate of fifty percent (50%) of his straight time daily rate
for any or all of his accumulated sick days over one hundred days.
D. Upon the retirement of a Township Police Officer, the Township shall compensate that
Police Officer for all of his then accumulated sick days at the rate of fifty percent (50%) of
his regular straight time daily rate for each accumulated sick days.
E. If a Police Officer dies, off duty, prior to retirement, the Township agrees to compensate the
eligible dependents for any accumulated sick days. The payment shall be at the rate of fifty
percent (50%) of his regular straight time daily rate for each accumulated sick day.
F. A Police Officer may distribute unused sick days to other members of the police force when
he deems necessary. The aforementioned distribution of unused sick days to other members
of the police force shall be with the written approval of the Chief of Police after his being
provided with appropriate documentation to assure proper distribution and accountability
thereof.
G. If an officer dies on duty, the Township agrees to compensate the eligible dependents for any
accumulated sick days. The payment shall be at the rate of one hundred percent (100%) of
his regular straight time daily rate for each accumulated sick day.
ARTICLE NO. XIV - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Should dispute arise between the parties as to the meaning and application of the provisions of
this Agreement, or with respect to every day working conditions, such differences shall be settled
in the following manner:

FIRST STEP
The grievance shall be submitted, in writing, to the Police Chief within ten (10) working days
after the occurrence of the grievance. The grievant, with or without a member of the Grievance
Committee, shall attempt to settle the grievance with the Police Chief. An answer, in writing, by
the Police Chief will be given within three (3) working days from the date the grievance is first
presented.
12

SECOND STEP
If the grievance is not resolved at the First Step, the Union may appeal to the Second Step
five (5) days after the First Step answer is received, by written notice to the Chainnan
Police Committee. The Chainnan of the Police Committee shall then airnnge a meeting
two (2) weeks between the members of said Committee, the Township Commissioners
designee, the Police Chief, and the Union. The Township will then give a written answer
five (5) days after said meeting.

within
of the
within
or its
within

THIRD STEP
.
In the event the grievance is not settled at Step Two, either party may, upon notice to the other,
appeal the grievance to arbitration within ten (10) days from the date of receipt of the
Township's answer at the Second Step. The parties shall then promptly attempt to mutually
agree upon an impartial arbitrator within five (5) working days after appeal to arbitration. If the
parties are unable to mutually agree upon an impartial arbitrator, then the Township and the
Police Officers shall request the Pennsylvania Mediation Service to submit a panel of seven (7)
names of suggested arbitrators. The parties shall then select the impartial arbitrator from such
list by each party altemately removing one (1) name from the list until but one name remains,
with the Union being the first to strike a name for the first grievance. For any additional
grievances, the strike first procedure will alternate between the Union and the Township.
The decision of the impartial arbitrator shall be final and binding on the parties. The expense of
the impartial arbitrator selected, including any costs imposed on securing a panel of arbitrators
from any state, federal or private bureau and of the transcript of the testimony, if the parties
mutually agree upon having the testimony of the hearing transcribed, shall be borne equally by
the Township and the Union.
The impartial arbitrator shall submit his decision within thirty (30) days of hearing unless time is
extended by mutual agreement of the parties.
In a discharge or suspension case, the impartial arbitrator shall have the authority to sustain the
suspension or discharge, or, if he finds a suspension or discharge was not proper, he shall then
have the authority to order reinstatement and compensation for time lost in whole or in part, or to
find the penalty imposed on the employee was to severe and award a less severe penalty.
Saturday, Sunday, and designated holidays shall not be included in time limits set forth above.

If a grievance is not responded to, it will be deemed denied and the Union shall proceed to the
next step of the Grievance procedure.
ARTICLE NO. XV - JURY DUTY
Any police officer covered by this Agreement who is ordered by the appropriate authority to
report for jury duty shall be granted a leave of absence from his regular duties for the actual
period of such jury duty and receive for such period of jury duty, the difference between any jury
duty compensation they receive and their regular wages for each day of jury service which fall
on the officer's regularly scheduled working days. When an officer receives notice that he is to

13

report for jury duty, he shall notify the Chief immediately. The Township reserves the right to
request the County to release and relieve any officer from jury duty.

ARTICLE NO. XVI - POLICE PENSION FUND CONTRIBUTIONS
A. Based on information provided to the Township by the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
System (PMRS), the Police Pension Fund Member contributions are zero percent (0%) of
compensation.

B. Upon receipt of the new Act 205 Actuarial Valuation Report either party may re-open the
collective bargaining agreement strictly for negotiating the issue of whether officer
contributions are necessary in order to maintain the actuarial soundness of the plan. This
Board of Arbitration shall retain jurisdiction to resolve any re-opener issues.

ARTICLE NO. XVII - POLICE PENSION FUND IMPROVEMENTS
A. Township agrees that Secti n 4, Item (a) of Ordinance N . 436 for the life of this Agreement
will be amended to eliminate the Federal S cial Security percentage benefit offset against
any Police Pension Fund benefit to which they are otherwise entitled by reason of age and
years of service.

The Township further agrees that officers will have one hundred percent (100%) vested
retirement benefits after completing twelve (12) years of service.
The Township further confirms that it is a member of the Pennsylvania Municipal Retirement
System and said entry into that system was carried out after a secret ballot showing
acceptance of said Plan by seventy-five percent (75%) of the Officer covered.
B. Each Police Officer with more than twenty-five (25) years of service as a Township Police
Officer shall be entitled upon his or her retirement to a pension service increment. Such
service increment shall be calculated by multiplying an Officer s whole year of service at
retirement in excess of twenty-five (25) years times 2.5% (0.025) of the Officer's annual
pension benefit. In no event may the service increment benefit exceed twelve bwidred
dollars ($1 200) per year.

ARTICLE NO. XVIII - PREVIOUS BENEFITS RETAINED
Previous benefits obtained thr0l1gb binding arbitration or formerly enjoyed by the Police Officers
as working conditions established through Township policy or Township Ordinances are retained
and are to be continued except a inconsistent with this Agreement.
Th.is Agreement
incorporates all prior benefits achieved through arbitration and as specifically recited herein as
contemplated in Article XIX hereof.

ARTICLE NO. XIX - MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
The Township has the exclusive right and power to manage, control, and conduct its business, to
plan and direct the police force, including the right to hire, suspend, discharge, promote, demote,

14

schedule and transfer its Police Officers for good cause, and to make rules relating to operation
as it deems advisable, subject, however, to other provisions of this Agreement and past practices.

ARTICLE NO. XX- STIPULATION
Thi Agreement contains the entire agreement between the Township and the Police Officers. It
i stipulated and agreed by and between the parties that this Agreement contains the full and
omplete recitation of any and all agreements and polices made and incorporates all prior
arbitration awards.

ARTICLE NO. XXI-SEPARABILITY

AND SAVINGS CLAUSE

If any Article or Section of this Agreement should be invalid by operation of law or by any
tribunal of competent jurisdiction, or if compliance with or enforcement of any Article or Section
should by restrained by such tribunal pending final determination as to its validity, the remainder
of this Agreement or the application of such Article or Section to persons or circumstances other
than those as to which it has been held invalid or as to which compliance with or the enforcement
of has been restrained, shall not be affected thereby. Any masculine term used hereiJ?.shall
include the feminine and vice versa.

ARTICLE NO. XXII - MISCELLANEOUS
A. Officer Safety and Confidentiality - no officers' personal information or work schedule will
be released to the general public.

B. Take l ome Car - The prior take home car system shall be eliminated. Police officers will
be required to provide their own transportation to and from the municipal building when it is
determined by the OIC, based on the Township's operational needs, that the police officer
cannot be transported by an on-duty officer.
C. Probationary Period - Newly appointed police officers shall serve a probationary period of
one (1) year. During the probationary period an officer may be dismissed at the Township's
discretion and the dismissed officer will be precluded from grieving the termination under
the grievance procedure contained in this agreement.
D. Policies - New and revised policies will be provided to the Union Steward thirty (30) days
preceding their effective date. If the Union files no objection within the thirty (30) day
period, the Union will be deemed to assent to the new/revised policy. If the Union objects,
they must do so in writing and must specify in detail which sections are contested.
Negotiations, to the extent required by law, will thereafter commence.
E. Seniority - Seniority shall be defined as the length of continuous service in the bargaining
unit. Continuous service shall be computed from the last date of hire. Continuous service
shall be broken by:
1. Quit - Absence for three (3) consecutive workdays without notice to the Township shall
also constitute a "quit;"
2. Discharge for just cause;
15

3. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Section, absence from work for any
reason for a period in excess of eighteen (18) months;
4. Layoff in excess of twenty-four (24) calendar months;
5. Failure to report to work within five (5) days after recall to work sent by certified mail to
the employee's last known address. Each employee is responsible for maintaining with
the Township residence address information; and
6. Transfer or promotion to a position outside of the bargaining unit.
F. Bill of Rights 1. When an anonymous complaint is made against a police officer and no corroborative
evidence is obtained, the complaint shall be classified as unfounded.
2. The Township will investigate anonymous complaints.
3. During an internal investigation, a police officer may, at his/her discretion, have a Union
representative present.
4. In accordance with applicable law, a police officer may review his/her personnel file.
G. Residency. Employees hired after the execution of this Agreement are required to establish
their residence in the geographical boundaries of Elizabeth Township within one (1) year of
their appointment. At the discretion of the Chief of Police, the residency time period may be
extended for an additional one (1) year.

ARTICLE NO. XXIII - TERM OF AGREEMENT
This Agreement shall become effective January 1, 2018 and remain in full force and effect
through December 3 1, 2021.
WITNESS the hands and seal of the TOWNSHIP OF ELIZABETH, through its proper officers,
and the TEAMSTERS LOCAL UNION NO. 205, through its proper officers.

TEAMSTERS LOCAL 205

TOWNSHIP OF ELIZABETH

~~&~
sPr/t7

B· 2.2.- \7

Date

Date

16

EXHIBIT A

Elizabeth Township
Drug and Alcohol Testing Policy
Elizabeth Township believes that it is essential to ensure that its employees come to work free of
the influence of drugs or alcohoJ. No employee shall use, possess, or be under the influence of
any ill gal drug (including prescription drugs, which are not prescribed for the employee);
r p rt for duty or remain on duty while under the influence of any legaJ prescription dmg t the
extent that job perfonuance is adversely affected; repoti for duty or remain on duty while having
a blood alcohol concentration of .02 or greater; or consume alcohol for at least eight (8) hours
after a reportable vehicle accident and/or firearm discharge for which a post-accident drug or
alcohol test is required.
It is the policy of the Township to test for alcohol or drug use when there is cause to believe that
an employee is involved with or under the influence of alcohol or drugs in the workplace. In
addition, each employee will undergo two mandatory drug and alcohol tests administered on a
random basis each calendar year. As soon as possible, but no later than 2 hours after a reportable
vehicle accident occurs during employment hours, any employee whose performance either
contributed to the accident or whose performance cannot be completely discounted as a
contributing factor to the accident shall be drug/alcohol tested. All covered employees shall
immediately report all accidents issued during the employees' course of his/her shift regardless
of the ownership of vehicle involved in the accident. Employees will also be tested for the
presence of alcohol or drugs after he/she has discharged his/her firearm while performing the
duties of the position within 2 hours of the discharge.
Testing by the state for CDL licensure or by the Township for cause shall count toward an
individual's alcohol and drug testing obligation for the remainder of the calendar year.
Refosal to submit to testing shall be regarded as a positive test result for purposes of this policy.
Testing will be for illegal substances, including some medications available by prescription. If
the employee tests positive for the prescribed drug, the testing agent will verify usage through
the prescribing physician. Once verified, the testing agent will record the test result as negative
and report a negative result to the Township. If the testing agent is not able to verify the
prescription, the positive result will be reported to the Township.
All test results will be strictly confidential. Results will be reported to the Township Manager.
Test results will not be discussed with any Township employee, including managers and
commissioners.
First Positive Result

The Township Manager will discuss the positive result with the employee.
discussion, the employee shall:
1.

Be suspended without pay, and

17

Based on that

2.

Be referred to a Substance Abuse Professional (SAP) approved by the Township.

Employees entering_the rehabili_t~tionprogram will be req~tired to fulfill all th _requirements _of
the program, includmg any a,dd1honalalcohol or drug testing. The program, not the Township,
will stablish requirements for successful completion. The Township will be notified when the
employee has successfully completed the program.
If the employee successfully completes the program, he/she will be reinstated. The Township
may test the reinstated employee at its discretion during the following twelve (12) months to
assure continued compliance.
If the employee refuses to participate or fails to successfully complete the program, he/she will
be terminated.
Subsequent Positive Results

If the employee fails a subsequent alcohol or drug test within three years of a prior positive test,
he or she will be terminated. Failure of a subsequent alcohol or drug test beyond three years
shall be regarded as a first Positive Result.
Compliance with the foregoing policy shall be subject to the contractual grievance and
arbitration procedure. However, the discipline defined in this policy shall not be subject to
change and/or alteration by an arbitrator. An arbitrator's authority shall be solely limited to a
detennination as whether an employee has violated the terms of this policy.

18

EXHIBITB

ontrru::t ear

None
None

can, etc.

ICC YlSJts

on

19

and

es

e·
hf! by Preni1~r 'l1lrll10C): e(Worl- Nol
l}'Jtdon Ne/w()ik. f'rescrlp11orofilled al a nonetworkp/uJm,acy,arenot coverid.

None per Contract year
None
Contract ear

Y iq,
$8/$16 24 generic copayment
$40/$80/$120 brand copayment

Malnwwice Drags ~ Mafl Order(90-daySupply)
$16 gem:nc copayment
$80brand copayment

our _groups neut pool) 1~ as on• ontrn<:! car. e onuu.ct car is a consecnuve -mon p.,.no cgmnmg-onyour cmp yer s renew ate. oatacl
yo111employer fo dcrennine Ille renewal d•~ applrcableto Y!lurprogram.
. .
·
~2-)ScrvlC!C$
an: tirnlterlto thoSclisted on the H!gl>mnrk
~-.:cnuvc Sch~lc. Gender, age _andfrC9.u1:ncy
!~ts may apply.
(:3) 'freattnc:ntiocludl!tcovet"88efl)f'the correctionof a pl,ys,ca.lor medical problem assoo1atcdwi!b 1nfcrtihty. Infertility drug therapy may or may not be covered
d~ngonyour~up'sprc.scriftion~g.[l~O~
.
.
.
, .
. .
(4 ) Hfiihmm(lfea,lthc.nMarytgcmon·Scf'!tces(li/1'1,S)
m!'sl be contacted pnor to 1!planned_mpat!cntadm1s,s1on
~r w1thi'l4? hours of an emergency or mn1cmicyni!iitedin~ticnl llwhi&sion,Some facility Pf?.VId~ will cont.actHMS and O~lrunprucrtificahon of the lnP,allcntadm1ss1onon y_owbehalf. Be:sure lo verify that
}'l,UJ"provJ'1ct
is c;plJ(aat\ogHMSfor prcicitilicat1on lf not,.you arc r~pons1blc for _contactingHMS. If lliis docs not occur and n Is later determinedthaJ all or part
of the iupatichl stay WIISnot mcdicnlly n.ass!IJYor appropnato,.you will be rcspons1blcfor payment of any costs not cov~.
c,s Ptescripuonso,-..covcrul a.1 long as they MClisted on·lhe Pf1:SC11P?0!1
drugformula.ry!'PPlicableto yow;pf3.l\.To ob.laina prescription medicationthat~ Dot
in~l\uledon lhis fonnula,ry,your daclor m~t complclc the Pri:scnpt1on_DrugMedicill.iooRcquC-111
Fo_nnand return II to the Pb.antL1cyAffain Departmentfor
clinical tevicw,l.:lnderthe mnndaiorygeni:ncproYISt~n. Y(!U
n.rcresponsible for tfu: payment dlffercntial when a generic drug is avo.!ID1>1e
and you or yow doctor
apcc!1icsa brand name drug, Your pnyment1sthe pnce differencebetween the:brand nnmc drug and the g;aicric drug in ndaition to the brand name drug copaymcnt
or coinSuranaeamounts, wliich may apply,

Thi.r.

.
1oio/Jzrf'{
vtttt"4ed a.r a r:qrllruct of beMfi_rs.ft u duiKnt!d puuly
0 SharingPPOBlue $250 W-A-CLSHPPO

as a u/erencl! of thi!many ben¢i/J a,•ailah/1!und1tryour pro Kram.

.

