AGREEMENT BETWEEN

Teamsters Local Union No. 205

Representing

South Park Police Department

AND

The Township of South Park
Effective Dates

January 1, 2018 — December 31,2021

Table of Contents

Section |

Section 2

Section 3

Section 4

Section 5

Section 6

Section 7

Section 8

Section 9

Section 10
Section 11
Section 12
Section 13
Section 14
Section 15
Section 16
Section 17
Section 18
Section 19
Section 20
Section 21
Section 22
Section 23
Seetion 24
Section 25
Section 26
Section 27
Section 28
Section 29
Section 30
Section 31
Section 32
Section 33
Section 34
Section 35
Section 36
Section 37
Section 38
Section 39
Section 40
Section 41

Recognition ......
Dues Check-off... =
Job Classifications and Wage Rates...
Management Rights.,
Past Practice, As Is Clause

Work Period and Hour Regulations
Seniority...
Holidays...
Vacation...
Grievances
Suspension and Discharge.
Safety.......
Jury Duty
Bereavement, ai feARERAN RINE
Hospitalization and Medical Benefits...
Additional Insurances...

                      

 

 
 

RRwo

 

 

coy

oto

 

 

   

               

Loss of Insurance Coverage.
Pension Employee Contributions..........
Sick Leave Definition. He a
Uniform Allowance Maintenance and Firearms...
Travel Allowance...
Educational Police Training
Educational Incentive Pay.
Nondiscrimination.......,.. ty oe
Occupational Injury “Workers Compensation”...
Unemployment Compensation.
Police Officer's “Bill of Rights”
General Provisions ........000. os
Separability and Savings Clause reseney
Functions and Duties of Police Department...
Military Leave...
General Conduct of Members .,
In-Service Training eins
Drug and Alcohol Abuse - Statement of Need,

Policy on Employee Assistance Program - Statement of Need
Drug Testing Policy...
Outside Employment.
Job Stewards...
Effective Date...

 

 

                   

 

  

 

 
Labor Agreement

 

 

Made and entered into this {*' day of January, 2018 by and between the Tow: ship of South Park,
hereinafter referred to as “Township” and Teamsters Local Union No. 205, hereinafter referred to as
the “Union”.

Section] Recognition

 

The Township recognizes Teamsters Local Union No. 205 as the sale and exclusive Tepresentative of
al] full-time and regular part-time police officers including but not limited to patrolmen, sergeants
and lieutenants; and excluding the Chief of Police, the Deputy Chief of Police and any other
managerial employees. PF-R-81-14-W

Section 2 Dues Check-off
1

 

The Emplayer agrees to deduct monthly Union Dues and/or uniform assessments of the Local
Union from the first pay of each month of any employee from whom written authorization is
received and to send such dues to the Secretary-Treasurer of the Union on or before the end of
the month for which deduction is made,

we

The Union agrees to indemnify and save the Employer harmless from any and all claims, suits or
other forms of liability arising out of deduction of money for all Union dues under this Arlicle,

Section 3 Job Classifications and Wage Rates

The following base rates shall be granted by the Township as follows:

Base Salary - Hourly Rates of Pay

  

 

  

Lieutenant

Sergeant $47.40 $48.59 $49.80 $51.05
Patrolman $45.13 346,26 $47.42 $48.61
Junior Patrolman Subject to Seetion 3.2

Part-Time Patri

 

man Subject to Section 3.3

Section3,1 Rank Differential

During the term of this Agreement, it is intended at all times, a Sergeant shall be compensated at a
rate of five percent (5%) greater than the rate paid to a Patrolman and Lieutenant shall be
compensated at a rate ten percent (10%) greater than the rate paid to a Patrolman. Except if a

Lieutenant is Acting Chief, then the rate shall be fifteen percent (15%) greater than a Patrolman, A
Lieutenant shall be considered as “Acting Chief only if the Chief has been absent from work far
more than thirty (30) consecutive days and the Township has not appointed an “Acting Chief” in his
place,

Section 3.2 Junior Patrolmen

A Junior Patrolman is defined as a full time Police Officer newly hired during the first six (6) years
of conseculive employment by the Employer, The wage rates to be paid a Junior Patrolman shall be
as follows;

A. First year of service: 60% of a Patrolman base salary
B, Second year of service: 70% ofa Patrolman base salary
C. Third year of service: 80% ofa Patrolman base salary

D. Fourth year of service: 85% of a Patrolman base salary
E. Fifth year of service: 90% Patrolman base salary rate
PF. Sixth year of service: 100% Patrolman base salary rate
(AAA No, 55-L-360-00201-9-W)

 

Section 3.3 Part-time Patrolmen

Part-time pairolmen, if hired by the Township, shall comply with AAA Case No. 55-390-0024-90,
issued November 26, 1990, Myron L, Joseph, Arbitrator, and all benefits and working conditions
shall be negotiated with the Union prior ta employment of any Part-time Patrol Officer.

A. Compensation 1999 - $10.74 per hour

 

B. No other benefits, except as mandated by law, shall be provided to part-time Patrol Officers,

9

Part-time Patrol Officers shall not work mere than twenty-four (24) hours per week. This
restriction is not to intend to apply to court time,

Gg

Part-time Patrol Officers may not be used while any full time Patrol Officeris furloughed, unless
that officer tums down the available work or is otherwise unavailable.

a

Part-time Patrol Officers will not accrue seniority, nor will they work more than eight (8) hours
in any day, These restrictions are not in tended to prohibit a Part-time Officer from completing
his duties or making required court appearances. (This is in compliance with AAA File No. 55-
390-021 8-93, issued February 18, 1994, by Carl F. Stoltenberg.)

Section 3.4 Longevity

In addition to base salary, all members hired prior to January 1, 2012, shall be entitled to longevity
based upon their appropriate years of service according to the following schedule; all caleulations are
based on base salary rate and are to be paid on the pay period following the member's anniversary
date:
A. Two percent (2%) of the base salary rate to be paid at the beginning of the sixth (6th) year of
service,

B. Three percent (3%) of the base salary rate to be paid at the beginning af the eleventh (11th) year
of service.

C. Four percent (4%) of the base salary rate ta be paid at the beginning of the sixteenth (1 Gth) year
of service.

D, Five percent (5%) of the base salary rate to be paid at the beginning ofthe twenty-first (2st) year
of service.

E. Employees hired after January 1, 2012, shall nat be eligible to receive the Longevity benefit as
listed herein.

Sectiond Management Rights

pechon 4 Management Rights

‘The Township reserves and retains, solely and exclusively, all of its common law rights to manage
the business of the Township as such rights existed prior to execution of this agreement, including
the right to determine adequate employee staffing for all work subject, however, to the provisions of
this Agreement.

Section4.1 Union Responsibility

The Union recognizes and accepts the responsibility of insuring that every employee complies at all
times with the South Park Township Police Manual, also known as Jtesolution No. 6-1-76, a copy of
said manual being attached hereto. Any grievance arising pursuant to said manual shall be disposed
of in a manner outlined in the Grievance Procedure in the Agreement. The Union also recognizes
and accepts the need for frequent updating, revision and amendment of the Police Policy Manual.

Section 4.2 Work Rules

The Union recognizes that the Police Department must be operated venty-four (24) hours a day and
three hundred sixty-five (365) days per year, in this regard the Union recognizes that all police
employees will exert every effort to insure that adequate police protection is available at all times
and that sufficient manpower will be available to insure effective operation. Also, reasonable worl
rules may be instituted by the Township after discussing with the Union; any disputes over the
reasonability of the implementation and/or application of such work rule may be made subject to the
Grievance Procedure contained in the Agreement. (This complies with AAA File No, 535-390-021 8-
93, issued February 18, 1994, Carl F. Stoltenberg, Arbitrator.)

Section 4.3 Resicleney

Patrol Officers must establish their primary residency within a radius of ten air miles of the
municipality's building. (This complies with AAA File No. 535-390-021 8-93, issued February 18,
1994, Carl F, Stoltenberg, Arbitrator.)

 

 

Section 5___ Past Practice, As Is Clause

2cchon 5 rast Practice, As Is Clause

All existing benefits and practices previously enjoyed by members of the bargaining unit not
modified by this Agreement shall remain as is, subject to mutual negotiations.

 

Section 6 Work Period and Hour Regulations

The workweck shall consist of any five (5) workdays in the calendar week from Sunday through
Saturday. The workday shall be any cight (8) consecutive hours within the period of midnight to
midnight of the calendar day; up lo one and one half (1 4) hours may be in the preceding or
subsequent day. There shall bea minimum of twelve (12) hours off between scheduled shifts. Any
Violation of the one and one-half (1 4) hour overlap period or the twelve (12) hour minimum
between shifts shall entitle the affected officer to time and one-half (1 '4) his base salary rate for all
hours of the violation. ‘This shall include all full-time Police Employees, except Junior Patrolmen.

 

Section 6.1 Shift Change Clause- Prior Notice

Beginning January, 2019, Officers will work the 5-2 shift schedule proposed by the Bargaining Unit
on or about August 23, 2018 and as discussed in Executive Sessions on Atgust 31 and September
19, 2018 respectively, with the following changes: Shift schedules will beposted on a four (4) month
rotation. Officers will be permitted to select their preferred shift schedule by seniority. Officersmay
not bid the same shift schedule in consecutive order.

For example: Senior Officer bids the daylight shift the first four month schedu € may not bid the
daylight shift for the second four month schedule but may, once again , bid the daylight shift forthe
third four month schedule and so on for the term of this Collective Bargaining A preement, This will
be a continuous process and not restarted each calendar year,

However, the fact that an Officer cannot bid the same shifi schedule in consecutive order does not,
by virtue of an Officers seniority, or lack thereof, preclude an Officer from being scheduled and
working the same shift consecutively, ie, junior Officers.

All full-time police employees, with six (6) or more full years of consecutive service, including
Lieutenants, Sergeants and Patrolmen shall have their schedule posted yearly in advance, in
accordance with the Vacation Pick Section of this Agreement, Shift reassignment however, may take
place whenever an absence of a police employee occurs in excess of two (2) weeks due to injury,
illness, emergency or other unforeseen circumstances whi ch would cause a manpower shortageon
any shift. (Shift reassignment will take place whenever a particular officer has been absent for two
(2) consecutive weeks. The officer will be filling in for that shift only and will notbe Tequired to also
fill the duties of his original shift. The Township will not make shift reassignments based on the
combined absences of more than one (1) officer).

 

The Township shall first request volunteers to transfer shifts. In the absence of volunteers, the
Township shall transfer the least senior officer(s), excluding sergeants, In the event that the least
senior officer being transferred has already made a vacation selection for the time period during
which he has been reassigned, he will be given said vacation that he originally selected at the
beginning of the year, However, the Township can replace him with the next least senior patrol
officer during those vacation days, An exception to this clause shall continue to be the case of the
Lieutenant who has changed from the daylight shift to any other shifi to fulfill his responsibilities in
the absence of the Chief or Assistant Chief. Such Lieutenant may be transferred at any time without
notice,

Patrolmen with less than six (6) full years of consecutive service shall have their schedule posted at
least two (2) weeks in advance. Rescheduling Patrolmen with less than six (6) full years of
consecutive service shall not be a violation of this Section.

At the request of either party, both parties shall meet for the Purpose of discussing and jointly
establishing guidelines under which a change of shift in the posted schedules of full-time Police
employees with six (6) or more full years of consecutive service may be made without penalty to the
Township, (AAA No. 35-L-360-00201-99-W)

When unusual and extenuating circumstances arise that does not permit following the normal
procedure, under which a change in shift in the posted schedules of full-time Police employces with
six (6) or more full years of consecutive service is to be made, the Township may make such shift
reassignments with no less than two (2) weeks’ notice, However, the reason and the decision tomake
a shift reassignment, under this language, will not in Any way be arbitrary, capricious or unreasonable
and both the reason and the decision may be subject to the party’s grievance procedure.

Section 6.2 Overtime

Overtime will be allotted to all full-time Police employees, with seniority prevailing, ona rotating
and equal basis. Employees shall be compensated at a rate of one and one half (1 14) hours in a
workday or forty (40) hours in a workweek. Note: Refer to AAA Case No. 55-390-0024-90, issued
November 26, 1990, Myron L. Joseph, Arbitrator.

Effective January 1, 2012, Court Time shall be removed from the overtime rotation board

Section 6.3 Officer in Charge (Working ina Higher Rank)

When a member is performing the duties of ahigher rank, the member shall receive compensation at
the ratehe would have received had he been promoted to that next higher rank. Ifa member works
the majority of hours ona shift, it shall be considered as a whole day at the higher rank, When no
rank of Sergeant, Temporary Acting Sergeant or above is involved, the determination shall be made
according to the Patrolmen with greatest seniority on any regularly scheduled work shift, The
Patrolmen shall be compensated at Sergeant’s rate of pay.

Section 6.4 © Compensatory Time

An employee may elect to take compensatory time in leu of overtime. The utilization of
compensatory time by an employee shall not cause overtime within the Department, An employee

5

seeking ta use compensatory time must provide forty-eight hours (48) advance notice prior to the use
of such compensatory time to the Chiefof Police or his designee, Employees may only accumulatea
reserve of twenty-four hours (24) of compensatory time. Compensatory time shall be used within
sixty (60) days of the date that it was earned,

Compensatory time not used within the sixty (60) day period shall be paid according to state and
federal law,

Section 6.5 Call Out Compensation

In the event that an employee is called out during a non-scheduled work shift, the employee shall be
compensated at a minimum of four(4) hours at one and one half (144) times his base salary rateor if
the time exceeds four (4) hours, the employee shall be compensated for the additional time at one
and one half (114) his base salary rate for all additional hours worked, Except if the hours precede
the employee's regularly scheduled shift, then the employee will only be compensated for the hours
acually worked, at one and one half (1 ¥4) his base salary rate,

Section 6.6 Overtime Refusal

No employee shall be justified or wan ‘anted, without valid reason to refuse to work overtime onany
day when the necessity for such overtime arises. To the extent that overtime arises and multiple
employees are available to work said overtime, the employee with the least seniority must accept the
overtime if employees with greater seniority are available,

Section 6.7 Caleulating Overtime

In calculating hours worked for the purpose of determining overtime, all hours worked in excess of
eight (8) hours per day and forty (40) per week, to include all meal periods, paid vacation days, paid
sick days, earned compensatory time, and time missed that is compensated under Heart and Ling,
Benefits

Section 6.8 Court Compensation

An employee otherwise not scheduled to work who must attend a hearing before any court or original
Jurisdiction on the business of the Township shall be compensated at time and one half (1 4) his
base salary rate for the time actually spent with a minimum of two (2) hours for an Appearance, A.
minimum of four (4) hours shall be paid at a time and one half (1/4) his base salary rate for
appearance in any State or Federal court unless the time exceeds four (4) hours, then the time and
one hall(] 14) will be paid for actual hours spent on the business of the Township. There shall beno
lunch payment for court; however, the Employee shall he permitted to keep his witness fee, The
Township shall continue to pay all applicable parking expenses,

 

Section 6.9 Shift Differential

All full-time Police Employees shall be paid a differential thirty-cents (3.30) an hour above their
base salary for all hours worked within the confines of the period 11:00 P.M. to 7:00 A.M.
Section 7 _ Seniority

 

Seniority is based on the length of contimous service the employee has, as a full-time Police Officer,
with the Township of South Park Police Department. Senioti tyshall be accumulated during absence
due to illness, layoff, or permitted leave of absence, as long as such seniority is not terminated in
accordance with other provisions of this Agreement

Section?.1 Layoff, Reealls and Awarding Job Bids

 

Inall cases of layoffs, recalls and awarding job bids, seniority shall govern if the ability to perform
the particular job is relatively equal. Employees last hired shall be first laid off, provided those
employees remaining are capable of performing the available work. The determination of the ability
of any employee to perform the available work shall rest with the Township, subject to the Grievance
Procedure in the Agreement.

 

Section 7.2. Probationary Employees

Any new full-time Police Officer Employee shall be considered probationary employees for a period
of eighteen (18) months from the beginning of their employment as regular full-time Police Officer
Employees, during which time they shall have no seniority. A probationary employee may be
summarily dismissed during such probationary period at the sole discretion of the Township. IEsuch
employee is retained beyond the probation period, he shall immediately therefore be classified as a
Junior Patrolman and his seniority shall commence as of the date of his original employment asa
Full-time Police Office:

 

Section 7.3 Seniority List

‘The Township will supply the Union with a seniorily list as of January 15th of evety calendar year,
setting forth dates of hire and job classifications of all Police Employees, including the employees’
addresses, and of any employees laid off, hired or rehired,

Section 74 Grounds for Breaking Senio ty

Seniority shall be broken for any of the following reasons:

A. An employee quits or resigns.

B. An employee is discharged for just cause
C, Anemployee is laid off for a period longer than twenty-four (24) consecutive months.
D. Anemployee is absent from work due to physical disability for twenty-four (4) consecutive

unless he is absent due to illness or injury acquired at work, subject to an impartial
physician’s certification of disability,

 

E, An employee fails to contact the Township within ten (10) calendar days and/or fails to report
back to work within ten (10) calendar days when recalled from layoffand a certified letterissent
to such employee's last known address in an attempt to notify him of his termination.

Section § Holidays

The Township shall grant to all full-time Police mployees covered by this Agreement eleven (11)
additional holidays as vacation days with eight hours pay at their base salary rate, The holidays shall
be:

 

New Year’s Day Memorial Day Veteran’s Day
President's Day Independence Day Thanksgiving Day
Good Friday Labor Day Christmas Dey
Easter Columbus Day

If any Police Employee works ona designated ho: iday, he will also be paid one and one-half (1 ”)
hours overtime pay. The Township shall grant to all Junior Patrolme: , during their first year of
service and through their fourth year of service, four (4) holidays as vacation days with eight (8)
hours pay at their base salary rate, At the start of their sixth (6") year of service as Regular Full-time
Patralmen, they shall receive the above listed eleven (I) holidays. (AAA No. $5-L-360-00201-99-
W)

 

 

 

Section 8.1 Personal Days

Five (5) personal days will be granted to all Police Employees under this Agreement, ALL requests
for personal day leaves must be approved by the Chief of Police or his designate and may not be
converted into pay; with the exception that an officer may sell back one (1) personal day at the end of
each year at the officer's regular hourly rate of pay, with no accrual.

‘The day should be requested within forty-eight (48) hours in advance or up to one (1) hour prior to
the shift requested when an unusual circumstance exists and approval is given by the Chiefof Police
or his designee. Once granted, the day cannot be revoked, No personal days may be taken on
designated holidays except when an unusual circumstance exists is given by the Chief of Palice or
his designate. The procedure for the selection of personal days shall be on a first-come, first-serve
basis, solely by seniority with no preference to rank, All personal day requests can be received no
earlier than January 1" for a calendar year, If a personal day is granted, it must be posted on the
schedule within ten (10) days. Two (2) officers will be permitted to schedule a personal day on the
same day, excluding holidays, provided that any personal day that would create overtime shall be
denied at the Township’s discretion. In accordanee with this section, the Township shall grant to
Junior Patrolmen, one (1) personal day dur ng their first year ofservice; two (2) personal days during
their second year; three (3) personal days during their third year; four (4) personal days during their
fourth year. The progression from one (1) personal day per year to four (4) personal days per year for
Junior Patrolmen shall remain in effect, and Patrolmen shall not be eligible for five (5) personal days
until their fifth year of consecutive employment.

 

 
Section 9 Vacation

 

All eligible full-time regular Police Employees to include Lieutenants, Sergeants, Patrolmen and
Junior Patrolmen covered by this Agreement sliall be entitled to receive the following vacations with
pay at their base salary rate;

 

 
 
  

|) Aniount of Vacation’

 

After 1 yr. but less than 2 yrs. 5 days 40 hours

 

After 2 yrs. but less than 5 yrs, 10 days 80 hours
After 5 yrs. but less than 10 yrs. 15 days 120 hours
Affer 10 yrs, but less than 15 yrs, 20 days 160 hours
After [5 yrs, but less than 20 yrs, 25 days 200 hours
After 20 yrs. 30 days 240 hours

Section 9.1 Picking Vaention

Starting November Ist of the calendar year, Police Employees eligible for vacation in the coming
year shall start to pick their vacations by seniority. Each employee shall have no more than two (2)
days to submit his vacation request once the employee is afforded his opportunity to pick or the
employee shall move to the bottom of the seniority list, All vacation requests must be submitied by
December 1st of the calendar year and the Township shall approve and post an approved vacation
schedule by December 31st of the calendar year preceding the year in which the vacations are to be
taken, The Township shall permit two (2) employees on vacation per day however, nly ane (1)
employee per shift, excluding Lieutenants and the Chief of Police.

 

When picking vacation as individual days, the Township shall permit up to three (3) officers out on
vacation as long as it does not create overtime, The decision to permit the third officer would be at
the sole discretion ofthe Police Chief. Ifmorethan one (1) officer requests to be the third officer off
On a single vacation day, that day shall be awarded by seniority with rank prevailing,

The Lieutenants shall pick their vacations and holidays amengst themselves by seniority with rank
prevailing, Police Employees will picle their vacation days first then go back to pick their ho idays
All piclcs shall be for an entire shift, pass day to pass day. The first vacation pick will be amaximom
of two (2) complete shifts, The second vacation pick, the Employee will be able to make as many
vacation picks as he pleases from pass day to pass day. The third pick will be holiday picks
Holiday picks will be as many picks as he pleases from pass day to pass day. Any vacation an
Officer is unable to use after it has been picked and approved shall be put hack up for bid, by
seniority. All vacation time must be used during the calendar year for which time it is allotted except
for vacation buy back and vacation carry over permitted by this Agreement. The final right to allot
vacation and to change such allotments is exclusively reserved to the Township in order to insure
orderly aperations, subject to the terms of this Agreement.

 

Section 9.2 Vacation Carry Over

Each full-time Police Employee, tainclude Lieutenants, Sergeants, and Patrolen may, at his sole
discretion, “carry over” a total of four vacation days per year, into a subsequent calendar year or
years. At no time may there be any accumulation of “carry over" vacation days in excess of twelve
(12) days, Any vacation day carried over into a subsequent year must be used within three years
from the year in which said date was carried over. The Employee entitled to carry over days must
elect this option on or before December 1 st of the calendar year. Junior Patrolmen during their first
year of service and through their fourth year of service are NOT permitted to “carry over” vacation
days. At the start of their fifth year of service upon reaching Patrolman status, they then shall be
entitled to the “carry over” benefit,

Section 9.3 Vacation “Sell Back”

Each full-time Police Employee, to include Lieutenants, Sergeants, and Patrelmen m ay, at his sole
discretion “sell back” to the Township and the Township “rust purchase” up to a maximum offive
(5) vacation days per year. There shall be no Ppyramiding of days sold. The sale of such vacation
days by the employee ta the Towns! ip shall be at the vate of one and one half the employee’s base
salary rate. All eligible Police Employees wishing to “sell back” vacation days must elect this option
before December Ist and the Township shall make payment in the first pay period in January. Junior
Patrolmen duing their first year of service and through their fourth year of service are NOT
permitted to “sell back” any vacation days. At the start of their fifth year of service, upon. reaching
Patrolman status, they then shall be entitled to the “sell back’? benefits,

Seetion 9.4 Reduction of Vacation

In the event that an employee with one (1) er more years of service is absent for any reason other
than an occupational injury or a paid vacation day, or a paid sick day or other paid day off pursuant
to this Agreement and is absent for more than forty (40) work days, his vacation pay will be reduced
by one percent (1%) for each additional two (2) days the employee is absent after forty (40) worl
days.

 

Section 10 Grievances

 

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE: A grievance is a dispute concerning the interpretation, application
or alleged violation of the specific terms or provisions of this Agreement, Any grievance arising
between the Employer and the Union or an Employee represented hy the Union shall be settled in the
following manner:

STEP ONE - The grievance shall be filed in writing within ten (10) working days of its occurrence
or knowledge of its occurrence. The Officer and the Job Steward shall first discuss the grievance
with the Chief of Police. Tf the grievance is not resolved to the mutual satisfaction of the parties,
then the grievance may be appealed by the Union and/or the Officer within five (3) workdays
following receipt of the written response of the Chief of Police in Step One to the Township
Manager and the Board of Supervisors.

 
STEP TWO.- The Township Manager and the Board of Supervisors within ten (10) workdays afler
receipt of the appeal. shall meet with the aggrieved Officer, his Job Steward, and the Union’s
Business Agent in an attempt to adjust the grievance, The Township Manager and Board of
Supervisors shall give the agarieved Officer and his Job Steward awritten decision within three (3)
workdays following the next regular monthl ly Supervisors’ meeting. If the Union does not proceed
with Grievance to Step Three within the time limits mutually agreed upon, the grievance shall be
considered to be satisfactorily resolved

 

STEP THREE - ARBITRATION - If the grievance has not been satisfactorily resolved at Step
Two, the Union may appeal to arbitration within ten (10) days after a decision at Step Two has been
rendered. A request for arbitration may be initiated by the Union serving upon the Township
Manager and the Board of Supervisors notice in writing of an intent to proceed to arbitration, The
notice shall identify the agreement provisions in dispute, the issue(s) to be determined, and the
Officer and/or Officers involved. Upon receipt of a notice requesting arbitration, the parties shall
attempt to select an arbitrator; if the parties cannot vo intarily agree upon the selection of an
arbitrator, they shall notify the PA Bureau of Mediation oftheir desire that the Service submit to the
parties a panel ofseven (7) arbitrators. Each party shall alternately strike until one (1) name remains,
The Township shall strike the first name at the initial grievance and thereafter the initial strike shalt
alternate between the Tewnship and the Union. The name remaining shall be the arbitrator.

 

A. The arbitrator shall have no power or authority to add to, subtract from or modify the
provisions of this Agreement in arriving at a decision on the issue(s) presented and shall
confine his decision solely to the application and interpretation of this Agreement,

B. The cost of arbitration shall be shared equally by the parties (Township and the Union).
Each party shall bear the cost of preparing and presenting its own case,

The grievance may be withdrawn by the Union or the aggrieved employee at any time, and the
withdrawal of any grievance shall not be prejudicial to the positions taken by the parties as they
relate to that grievance or any future grievance,

‘Time limits set forth in the Grievance Procedure shall, unless extended by mutual written Agreeinent
of the Township and the Union, be binding and any grievance not timely processed thereafter, shall
notbe arbitrable, In the event that the Township fails to meet any of the deadlines set forth above for
making a response, the Union may move the grievance to the next step of the grievance-arbitration
procedure. Weekends and holidays do not count.

The arbitralor’s decision shall be final and binding on all parties,

Section 1] Suspension and Discharee

 

The Township retains the right to suspend and discharge any em loyee for just cause. In all cases
involving discharge or suspension of an employee, the Township must notify the employee in writing
of his discharge or suspension and the reason therefore, Such notice shall also be given to the

 

appropriate union representative within forty-eight (48) hours after notice shall have been given to
the employee.

The procedures governing emergency suspensions and misconduct complaints are as outlined in this
agreement. (Refer to Section 36.16)

A discharged or suspended employee who believes he was suspended or discharged for unjust cause
must notify the employer in writing within five (3) calendar days after receiving notification ofsuch
actions against him or his desire to appeal the discharge or suspension. In such events, such
grievances shall then be handled in accordance with the piievance procedure set forth in the
Agreement, starting with Step Two.

Section 12 Safety

All marked police vehicles, with the exception of a vehicle used primacily by the Chief of Police,
will be equipped with the state of the art safety features, but minimally must be equipped with a front
interior mounted shotgun or rifle, a protective sercen separating the driver from the rear passenger
seat compartment and operational air conditioning

 

Section 13 Jury Duty

Any employee who has been called for jury duty shall be exeused from work for each such day on
which he serves or reports to serve and shall be compensated by the Township, at his regular base
salary rate; however, the employee if excused from jury service before 11:00 A.M. shall report to
work by 1:00 P.M. Any employee receiving notice to report to jury duty shall immediately notify the
ChiefofPolice. The Township shall reserve the right ta request the court to release and relieveany
employee from jury duty.

 

Section 14 Bereavement

 

In case of death in the immediate family, four (4) consecutive days with pay, if such are the
employee’s regular scheduled work days, will be eranted to all full-time Police Employees to include
Lieutenants, Sergeants, Patrolmen and Junior Patrolmen at theirbase salary rate. Immediate family
is defined as Mother, Father, Children, Husband, Wife, Brother, Sister, Mother-in-Law, Fatherin-
Law, Grandparents and Step Children and step Parents. (No longer than the day after the funeral.)

In the event of the death of an employee*s Brother-in-Law, Sister-in-Law, Aunt ar Uncle, the
employee will be granted two (2) days off with base salary rate of pay for his absence if such
employee’s regular scheduled work day.

The intent of the parties is to permit employees time off'in the event of bereavement without loss of
regular pay.
Seetion 15 Hospitalization and Medical Benefits

The Township agrees to provide the following hospitalization and medical insurance coverage for all
full-time Police Employees, to include Lieutenants, Sergeants, and Patrolmen, and their dependents.
Health care contributions for all police officers will be one and three-quarter percent (1.75%) of base
wages each year for the length of this Agreement,

Section 15.1 Benefit Coverage

A. The health care benefits will be provided through the Community Blue Flex Plan Benefits with
the Western PA Teamsters and Employers Welfare Find. Administration will be covered under
the same terms as above, otherwise this bargaining unit will remain in the current medical
coverage plan. The current Summary of Benefits are listed at end of this Agreement.

Highmark Blue Cross/Blue Shield High Option Dental Family Plan.

&

QA

. Vision Benefits of America Optical Plan.

D. Tri-Cemmunity South EMS, ambulance service, annual fee.

Fes}

hospitalization coverage
elsewhere shall be paid a medical in-lieu of payment of two thousand five hundred ($2,500.00)
dollars each year of the Agreement in which the coverageis waived, Proof of alternaie coverage

must be provided to the Township in order to qualify for said payment.

This complies with AAA File No, 55-390-0218-93 of February 18,1994, Car F, Stoltenberg,
Arbitrator.

Section 15.2 Substitution of Equal Plans

The Township may change medical plans, and/or carriers to comparable coverage. Comparable
coverage does not mean identical coverage and may include a different plan design for different
hospitals and doctors. The Township will notify the Union ofits intent to explore other options and
keep the Union informed of the steps being taken, Bargaining unit members shall cooperate in
completing questionnaires or providing medical information to underwriters and carriers within the
preseribed time periods. Such individual medical information shall not be provided to the Township.

Ifthe Township becomes subject to the ACA’s Cadillac Tax, the parties agree that the Township
shall have the right to reopen the contract to negotiate and/or arbitrate similar/comparable Health
Plan changes or other remedies to address or eliminate said tax liability. The arbitration process in
such an event shall be in accordance with the grievance process as outlined in Section 10 -
Grievances,

Section 15.3 Physician Visits and Prescription Co-Pays

‘The Township and the Union agree that payment of co-pays required by the Plan, including those for
physician visits or preseriptions shall be the responsibility of the employee.

Section 16 Additional Insurances

 

The Township agrees to provide and pay the premium for the following insurance eovera ge for all
full-time Police Employees:

A. False Arrest Insurance $300,000.00
B. Life Ynsurance during employment $ 50,000.00

Scetion 17_Insurance Benefits Into Retirement

The Township agrees to provide and pay for the following insurance coverage for retired Police
Employees:

A. Paid up Life Insurance at Retirement $5,000.00

B. Police Employees retired on or before December 31 , 1990, fifty percent (50%) of the premiums
for all retired employees for the hospitalization and medical insurance coverage for said
employees for the Blue Cross/Blue Shield three-hundred sixty-five (365) day Plan U, or its
equivalent,

C. Police Employees retired on or after January 1, 1991, shall receive two hundred and fifty
($250.00) dollars monthly toward the premium for this group rate for insurance coverage
commensurate with that in effect for employees an active duty. Such benefit shall only be
available for retired employees, and on! ¥ in the event and to the extent that comparable coverage
is not provided, without cost, from another source, In the event cost-free coverage is available
from another source and at some point becomes unavailable, the Township shall resume the tyo
hundred and fifty (8250.00) dollar per month payment toward the Township’s group rate. Atno
time shall this retired insurance payment be made to the retired officer, however, if the retired
officer has insurance coverage from another insurance carrier other than the Township’s carrier
and is paying for the insurance himself, the retired officer, can make arrangements for the
Township to make the two hundred and fifty ($250.00) dollar monthly Payment to the carrier of
his choice, as long as, itis not a carrier that he is teceiving cost-free coverage from, The two
hundred and fifty ($250.00) dollar monthly insurance supplement shall be terminated upon the
employee reaching the age of sixty-five (65), The Union wants to make clear and certain thatit
is understood that retired insurance coverage is only requested and negotiated for in order to
assist the retired employee to live with clignity and protection. The monthly two hundred and
fifty ($250.00) dollars toward insurance is not intend ed to supplement the pension if there is no
insurance coverage, it is only requested if caverage that is a cost to the relired employee is in
effect.
Police Employees retired on or after January 1, 2015; shall receive three hundred ($300.00)
dollars monthly toward the premium for the group rate for insurance coverage commensurate
with that in effect for employees on active duty.

Employees hired after January 1, 2012, shall not be eligible for the post-retirement health care
benefit,

Section 18 Disability Income Protection

The Township agrees to provide and maintain a program of disability income protection to all
eligible employees subject to this Agreement, Said program will provide benefits to the employee
effective the 31S¢ day after the occurrence ofa hon-occupational accidental bodily injury or sickness
and results in the inability of the employee to engage in his occupation as a Police Officer. The
benefits paid to such employee shall equal fifty percent (50%) of the respective employce’s gross
monthly salary computed on said employee's base salary. Said disability payment shall be capped at
thirty-six (36) months,

 

Section 18.1 Disability Income and Social Security

Should an employee be eligible for any social security benefits, the disability payments recited in
Section 18 shall be reduced to the extent that the total benefits obtained by the employee through
social security payments and disability income payments shall not exceed seventy percent (70%) of
the employee's gross monthly salary calculated on the employee's base salary rate in existence at
said time.

Section 18.2 Disability Income and Sick Leave

An employee shall not be required to use any accumulated sick leave days if he qualifies for or
receives any payments pursuant to the disability income protection insurance, but said employee may
elect ta do so, at which time, any disability payments made to the employee during such time as the
employee receives his base salary rate a3 a result of the use of his sick leave will be paid over to the
Township.

Section 18,3 Disability Income Payments “Net Amount”

Any payments made pursuant to the disability income protection shall be a“Net Amount” paid tothe
employee and shall not be subject to withholding, except as recited in Section 18.1 herein.

Section 18.4 Disability Income and Insurance Coverage

Any employee receiving disability income payment as provided for herein, shall nevertheless retain
all other insurance coverage provided for in this agreement to any other Employee.

Section 18.5 Off Duty Injury

A. In the event that a member of this department is injured while in an off-duty status, and the injury
requires hospitalization or extensive medical treatment, the member shall notify the Chief of
Police or the official then in charge.

wo

When a member is on sick leave as a result of an off-duty injury, he shall not engage in any
oulside employment,

€. When an injured member is able to return to duty, he shall first be examined by a physician who
will confirm the member's ability to retum to duty.

D. Healthcare shall be limited for non-work related injuries to thirty-six (36) months.

Section 19 Loss of Insurance Coverage

In case of an employee’s absence from work due to lay-off or leave of absence other than
occupational injury or non-occupational accident injury or sickness, the Township shall not be
obligated to pay for any insurance coverage for such employee beyond the end of the month in which
such absence begins, When such employee returns to work, all insurance coverage for said employee
will reecommence as of the first of the month following said employee's return ta work,

 

Section 20_Pension Employee Contributions

 

No pension contribution shall be required of bargaining unit members unless Act 205 Actuarial
Study demonstrates the necessity for such contribution, either to maintain the actuary status of the
plan, or to cover an increase in the MMO results from an improvement in benefit structure, If
contributions become necessary, the percentage level of such contributions shall be the minimum
necessary to meet Act 205 and Act 600 requirements and in any event, they shall not exceed (he level
authorized by Act 600. (This is in compliance with AAA File No. 55-390-0218-93, February 18,
1994, Carl F. Stoltenberg, Arbitrator.)

Pensions shall be calculated on the base wage ofall police officers hired on or after January 1,201 8,

The ten (10) year certain provision outlined in the Police pension plan document will be eliminated
to comply with state law with the exception of officers who are eligible for the benefit as of
December 31, 2017.

Section 20.1 Pension Calculations and Payments

Upon retirement provided that the minimum required service has been attained, an employee shall
receive fifty percent (50%) of his average monthly salary, including overtime and longevity
computed on the last thirty-six (36) months of service,

16
Section 20.2 Pension and Social Security

Each employee shall contribute to social security by way of withholding and the Township shall
contribute its employer contribution to social security so that each employee shall he eligible to
collect social security payments upon reaching the required age for payment of social security
benefits.

Section 20.3 Pension and Social Security Offset/Integration

A zero percent (0%) offset/integration factor of social security benefits is applied with relation to the
benefits paid pursuant to the Pension Plan. There shall be no offset or reduction in pension benefits
payable ta the employee by virtue of the payment of social security benefits.

Section 20.4 Widow’s Pension

The widow of any employee shall receive “Widow's Pension” as said term is defined in the existing
pension program to the extent of fifly percent (50%) of the pension that would othenvise be payable
to the retired employee. Said benefits shall contain a provision for an election to have a ten-year
guaranteed payout of benefits, which is intended ta benefit the spouse of retired married employees.
(This section has been amended to comply with Pennsylvania Act 30, signed into Jaw on April 17,
2003 and Amends Act 600.)

Section 20.5 Pension Service Increments

Anemployee, who has greater than twenty-five (25) years of service with the Township as a full-
time Police Employee, shall be entitled to additional pension increments of two hundred dollars
($200.00) per month commencing with the completion of the twenty-sixth (26) year of service,

Section 20.6 Pension Vesting

Employees with twelve (12) years of service shall be deemed to have vested in the Pension Program,

Section 20.7. Pension Board

‘The Township agrees that there shall be formed a five (5) member Pension Board, of which one a)
member shall be an active Police Officer, with voting rights. This board shall meet on the second
Tuesday of the following months of each calendar year: January, April, Tuly, and October, The
Pension Board shall be responsible to review, investigate and recommend the best possible
investment policy of the South Park Township Police Pension Fund so that, to the greatest extent
possible, the maximum benefits are made available to all employees covered by this agreement and
covered by the Pension Fund. A detailed report shall be made available to any and all employees
with an interest in the fund within fourteen (14) calendar days after the Pension Board meetings.

Section 21 Sick Leave Definition

 

The Township and the Union understand and agree that sick leave is a benefit earned by service and
is available when and if needed, and shall not he a right of taking such as vacation

 

Section 21.1 Sick Leave Benefits

All Current full-time Police Employees, including Lieutenants, Sergeants, and Patrolmen receive
seventeen (17) workdays in each calendar year as sick leave. All sick leave days shall be applied on
a workday basis.

All Junior Patrolmen shall receive five (3) workdays in the calendar year starting their first year of
service and through fourth year of service, however, upon the start of their fifth yeat of service when
reaching Patrolmen status, they shall receive the same sick leave benefits as all other full-time Police
employees.

Section 21.2 Sick Leave Notification

Employees shall notify their immediate supervisor or the Officer In Charge of the previous shift at
least one (1) hour prior to commencement of the employee’s regular shift, that said employee will be
on sick leave.

Section 21.3 Sick Leave Doctor’s Certificate

Employees, who are on sick leave for four (4) or mare consecutive work days shall be required to
submit a doctor’s certificate upon returning to work, said certificate must also indicate that the
employee is able to return to work without any limitations.

Seetion 21.4 Sick Leave Accumulation

All full time Police employees shall be permitted to accumulate 130 sick days to their date of
retirement, Any sick leave day accumulated above the specified number may be credited to an
escrow account in accordance with section 21.9 or sold to the Township at rate of 50% of the
employee's base salary rate for that year, By December 20th of each calendar year every employee
with sick days above the maximum accumulation shall report to the Township their intentions of
placing the excess days into escrow account and/or the retum of the excess sick days to the Township
for payment. Any payment due to the employee will be made in the first pay petiod of the
succeeding year. Ifno indication is made by the employee as to the option desired, all accumulations
will be placed in an escrow account, in accordance with Section 21.9.

Section 21.5 Siek Leave “Use of for other than Employee Sickness”

An employee to accommodate maternity needs and other serious illness and emergency situations
occurring in his immediate family will use the following, with theexpressed approval of the Chiefof
Police:

A. First the employee must use any accumulated compensatory lime.

B. In the absence of compensatory time, or if additional time is needed vacation time will be used.

18
C. Third, if insufficient vacation days are available, Personal days will be used,
D. Ifall of the above are exhausted, then sick leave may be used.

E. Last, if all of the above are exhausted, then use of sick day escrow aceumulation may be used in
accordance with Section 21.9,

Section 21.6 Sick Leave Upon Retirement

Upon retirement, an employee shall be reimbursed for each and every accumulated sick leave day,
which has been unused at the rate of sixty percent (60%) of the said. employee's then base salary rate,
In the event that a Police Officer dies prior to retirement, the aceumulated sick leave, based upon
foregoing formula shall be paid to the designated beneficiary of such Police Officer.

Section 21.7 Sick Leaye Bonus

An employee who does not take a sick leave day during any consecutive one hundred eight-two
(182) day period (counting all days whether worked or not, but excluding the period in which the
employee shall have been on disability resulting from a non-occupational accidental injury or
sickness) shall be paid the equivalent of eight (8) hours of his then base salary rate, Said additional
compensation shall be paid to the employee in the next regular pay subsequent to the completion of
one hundred eighty-two (182) day period,

Section 21.8 Sick Leave Reduction

In the event an employee with one (1) or more years of service is absent for any reason, he shall be
eligible for sick leave benefits so long as the absence is less than forty (40) workdays in any given
calendar year. If the absence is in excess of forty (40) workdays and is for any reason other than
occupational injury, sick leave benefits will be reduced ane percent (1%) for each two (2) additional
workdays that the employee is absent. Absence fi ' purposes of this section shall not include any
paid sick days, paid vacation days or any other paid days off pursuant to the terms of the Agreement.

Section 21.9 Sick Leave Escrow Account

 

All full time Police Employees shall be permitted to accumulate sick leave days over one hur
and thirty (130) days in an account set up for the employee, These sick leave days in escrow will be
available to the employee as sick leave, ifrequested by the employee and approved by the Board of
Supervisors of the Township. Approval of the Board of Supervisors is discretionary and shal] only be
given in unusual circumstances,

Section 22 Uniform Allowance Maintenance and Firearms

The Township will establish a Quartermaster System for the replacement of uniforms, The
Township shall appoint a Quartermaster whom would allow each full-time employee to replace his
uniform if approved by the Quartermaster in accordance with the uniform specifications established
for the Union. Each employee would be allowed to replace uniforms to a maximum ofsix hundred

19

($600.00) dollars per employee per year, Al] equipment and uniforms purchased shall be made from.
a Township-approved vendor,

Effective this date herein, the Township las agreed to purchase a bulletproof vest for all Police
officers who desire to wear one. Replacements of vests will be one of systematic purchase schedule
retained by the Chief of Police whereby the replacement will be based on the manufacturer’s
warranty and/or accidental damage. All Police Employees hired hereinatter shall be supplied a full
complement of uniforms (winter and summer) as approved by the Township. Theyearin whichthe
employee is hired and year after his date of hire the employee would not be eligible for replacement
of uniforms as through the quartermaster system except to replace uniforms damaged in the line of
duty.

The Township shall purchase and provide to all employees an appropriate firearm based on the
recommendation of the firearms officer and in accordance witha training program approved by the
Board of Supervisors and recommended by the Firearms Officer. All Police Employees shall be
issued and trained with an appropriate firearm. South Park Township shall retain the ownership of
the pistols that they purchase.

Section 23 Travel Allowance

 

All employees required to use their personal yehicle or public transportation to travel on business of
the Township will be reimbursed at the rate approved by the Internal Revenue Service per mile and
costs, where applicable, in case of the use of their personal Vehicle or will be reimbursed the
cost of public transportation.

 

Section 24 Edueational Police Trainin

Any emplayee wishing to voluntarily attend any school or training program to further his police
career rnay do so but only with the expressed written authorization of the Chief of Police and the
Township Manager in accordance with the policy set forth by the Board of Supervisors. The Board.
of Supervisors is the sole and exclusive discretion may authorize payment or reimbursement to the
employee for the costs for attending such school or training program, When any employee is cither
directed or given permission to attend any school or training program, the hours and the days
wherein said employee is attending such classes or programs, shall be construed as hours worked and
the employee shall be paid his base salary rate. In addition thereto, said employee shall be
compensated for travel expenses in accordance with Section 23, and co mpensated six ($6.00) dollars
for lunch ifsaid class or training program required morning and afternoon attendance,

Section 25 Educational Incentive Pa

 

Each employee awarded a degree from an accredited college or university will be paid the follow ng
additional compensation, payment of this stipend shall be made on or before December 3lstofeach
calendar year.
A. Associate Degree $200.00 annually
B. Bachelors Degree $300.00 annually
C, Masters Degree $500.00 annually .

Tn addition, the Township is offering a onc thousand dollar (31,000) one-time bons for members
who are awarded an Associate's Degree after the effective date af this contract (January 1, 1997)
from an accredited college in related subjects.

Section 26 Nondiscrimination
pecton £6 Nondiscrimination

Neither the Township nor the Associate shall discriminate against any employee for employment
covered by this Agreement on account of race, sex, Color, religious creed, national origin or age. The
use of the male gender of nouns or pronouns in this agreement is not intended to describe any
specific employee or group of employees but is intended to refer ta all employees regardless of sex,

Section 27 Oceupational Injury “Workers Compensation”

When the Township and an Officer agree that the officer was injured and is temporarily totally
disabled due to work-related accident or illness, the Officer shall seek any benefits offered through
the Township's workers’ compensation carrier, Monies payable to the Officer from this carrier shall
be endorsed over to the Township which will provide all of the benefits available to officers under
Pennsylvania Heart and Lung Act. Any disputes regarding entitlement to Heart and Lung Act
benefits will be subject to the Grievance Procedure, Resolutions of these disputes through the
Grievance Procedure is not to be based upon the “just cause” standard, but is 0 be based upon the
standard established by Pennsylvania Appellate Case Law interpreting the Heart and Lung Act.

Section 27.1 On Duty Injury

A, Any member of this department who in the course of performing his official duties, injures
himself, shall immediately notify the official in charge, The member shall then complete an
incident report listing the incident as “Injured Employee". Themember shall provide the detailed
facts surrounding the injury. In the event the member is ‘unable to complete an incident report
due to hospitalization or other cireumstances, it shall then be the responsibility of the Officer in
Charge to complete the incident report, .

 

 

B. When a member of this department required medical attention asa result ofan on:
shall be transported {o 2 hospital.

ty injury, he

oO

When a mentber is injured but does not require hospitalization and is capable of performing his
duties, the member shall return to duty after secking medical treatment as soon as possible.

D. The below listed notification shal] be made by the Officer in Charge any time a member is
seriously injured and/or hospitalized:

2]

1. Chief of Police, who will notify all other top officials

E. When a disabled member is able to return to duty, he shall first be examined byaphysician who
will confirm the member's ability to return to active duty,

F. Inno event shall a member who is on sick leave as a result of an on-duty injury and receiving
compensation from the Township engage in any outside employment or participate in sports or
strenuous work that may impair or jeopardize recovery from the original injury,

Section 27.2 Exposure to Communieable Diseases

In the event that a member, while in the performance ofhis official duti és, comes in contact with any
person who has a known or suspected comnmnicable diseasc, the member shall immediately be
transporied to the nearest haspital for medical treatment, After treatment the member shall then
complete an incident report listing the incident as contact with communicable disease.

Section 28 Unemployment Com pensation

 

The employer agrees to make the required contributions to the Unemployment Compensation fundof
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to cover all employees under this A greem ent for benefits under
the Pennsylvania Unemployment Compensation Law.

 

Section 29 Police Officer’s “Bill of Rights”
eee th cers bill of Rights”
A. When an anonymous complaint is made against a Police Officer and no corroborative evidenceis
obtained the complaint shall be classified as unfounded.

B. When any citizen complaint is filed greater than ninety (90) calendar days after the date ofthe
alleged event complained of, which if true, could not lead to criminal charges, such complaint
shall be classified as unfounded and the accused emplayee shall not be required to submit a
written report, but shall be notified o Hy or in writing of such claim

€. A Police Officer, whether a subject or witness, must be informed of t
interrogation at the autset of the interrogation.

nature of the

 

2

Ifthe interrogated Police Officer Writes a statement, a transcript is taken, or mechanical record
made, a copy of same must be given to the interrogated Police Officer, without cost, upon
request.

os

Ifany Police Officer under interrogation is under atrest, oris likely to be placed under arrest as a
result of the interrogation, he shall be com letely informed of all his rights prior to the
commencement of the interrogation.

22
F. At the request of any police officer under interrogation, he shall have the right to be represented
by the Union representative who shall be present at all times during the interrogation. The
interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonable time until tepresentation can be obtained,

G. Unless agreed ta by the officer, the Township shall not make any public comment on the Treason,
for any disciplinary action brought against any officer.

Section 30 General Provisions

This Agreement is subject in all respects to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with
respect to the powers, rights, duties, and obligations of the Township, Union and Employees in the
Bargaining Unit. Further, this Agreement is subject to any and all of the provisions of the Second
Class Township Code and the Code of Ordinances of the Townshi » of South Park as the same relates
to Police employees.

Section 31 Separability and Savings Clause

 

If any article or section of this agreement should be held invalid by operations of law or by any
tribunal of competent jurisdiction, or if compliance with or enforcement of any section should be
restrained by such tribunal pending a final determination as to its validity, the remainder of this
agreement or the application of such section to persons or circumstances other th an thoseasto which
it has been held invalid or as to which compliance with or enforcement of has been restricted as
above set forth, the parties affected thereby shall enter into immediate collective bargaining
negotiations, upon the request of the Union or the Township for the purpose of arriving at amutually
satisfactory replacement, either party may request that the matter be arbitrated under same terms of
Section 10.

 

Seetion 32 Functions and Duties of Police Department

A. The primary and foremost function of this department is to safeguard the lives and protect the
property ofall persons within the boundaries of the Township of South Park. This department is
responsible for the preservation of public peace, the enforcement of the laws, statutes and
ordinances of the United States Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the Township of South
Park. The apprehension of violators of those la ws, statutes and ordinances and the maintenance
of safe and orderly flaw of vehicle traffic and pedestrians on public thoroughfares,

 

B. Members of this depariment shall possess and exercise full police authority on land, water and
air within the territorial boundaries of the Township of South Park except

I on land water and air owned and/or cecupied by the United States
Govemment for military, postal or other purpases;
2, as limited by applicable law.

 

Within twenty-four (24) hours after receiving, orders, members requiring military leave for annnal
training shal] notify the Chief of Police of their need for military leave and the inclusive dates, A
copy of military orders will be supplied to the Chief of Police prior to leave.

Section 34 General Conduct of Members

ame eneral Conauct of Members

Members of this department shall conduct their public and private affairs ina mannerthat is b eyond
reproach and shall not be a discredit to themselves or this department.

Section 34.1 Obedience to Laws
No member of this department shall willfully violate any federal, state or Local law statute or

ordinance.

Section 34.2 Courtesy

 

Members of this department shall be courteous to the public. Members shall be tactful in
performance of their duties, shall control their behavior and exercise the wimast patience and
discretion and shall not engage in argumentative discussions even in the face ofextreme provocation.
In the performance of their duties, officers shall not use course, violent, profane or insolent language
or gestures and shalf not express any prejudice concem 'g race, religion, politics, national origin,
lifestyle or similar personal characteristics. In the performance of their duties, officers must maintain
a neutral and detached altitude without indicating disinterest or that a matter is petty or insignificant,
including verbiage used in radio transmission,

  

Section 34.3 Reporting for Duty

Members of this department shall report for duty at the time and place required by assignment o1
orders and shall be physically and mentally fit to perform their duties. ‘They shal] be properly
equipped and cognizant of their information required for the proper performance of duty so that they
may immediately assume their duties. Judicial Subpoenas and Distriet Court Notification shall
constitute an order to report for duty under this section.

Section 34.4 Derogatory Language

Members of this department shall not resort to the use of any curse, profane or insulting language
toward the general public,

Section 34.5 Use of Aleohol on Duty

A. Members of this department shall not consume intos icating beverages while in uniform or on
duty except in the performance ofplain-clothes investigative duty and while acting under proper
and specific orders from an official.
B. Members of this department shall not appear for duty or be on duty while under the influence of
intoxicants to any degree whatsoever or with an odor of intoxicants on their breath,

Section 34.6 Possession and Use of Drugs

No member or civilian employee of this department shall possess or use any controlled substan ce,
narcotic or hallucinogen except when prescribed by a physician for an illness or injury. Officer or
civilians experiencing adverse physical or emotional effects from any prescribed medication should
notify the supervising official in charge immediately.

Section 34.7 Sleeping on Duty

No member of this department shall sleep while on a tour of duty,

Section 34.8 Gambling

No member of this department shall sngage in any game of chance, card pl aying or gambling while
on duty unless authorized to do so in the performance of official responsibilities,

Section 34.9 Personal Appearance

A. Members of this department while on duty shall wear uniforms or other clothing in accordance
with established departmental procedures.

B. Except when acting under proper and specific orders from a superior officer, officers on duty
shall maintain a neat, well-groomed appearance and shall style their hair according to the
following guidelines:

1 Hair must be clean, neat and combed, Hair shall not be wom longer than the
top of the shirt collar at the back of the neck when. standing with the head at
normal posture. The bulk or length of the hair shall not interfere with the
nonnal wearing of all standard head gear,

2 Wigs or hairpieces are permitted if they conform to the above standards for
natural hair.

3s Sideburns shall be neatly trimmed and rectangular in shape and shall not be
lower than the ear lobe

4. Officers shall be clean-shaven except that they may have mustaches, which
shall be neatly trimmed.

Section 34.10 Unions

Members of this department shall avoid regular or continuous associations or dealings with persons
whom they know, or should know, are persons under criminal investigation or indictment or have a
reputation in the community or the department or present involvement in felonious or criminal
behavior, except as necessary for the performance of official duties or where unavoidable because of
the personal relationships of the officers

 

Section 34.11 Employee Participation and Political Activity

It is the poliey of this department that no member shall engage in a local, state or federal political
activity as a representative of this department.

A. Officers shell be permitted to:
register and vote in any clection.
attend political conventions, rallies, fund raising functions
actively engage in any non-partisan political functions
sign political petitions as individuals
A make financial contributions ta political organizations
i hold membership in a political party and participate in its functions to the
extent consistent with section 904 and 905 of August 5, 1941, PL752 as
amended, containing provisions governing political activity and assessments
He otherwise participate fully in public affairs except as provided by law to the
extent that such endeavors do not impaira neutral and efficient performance
of official duties or create real or apparent conflict of interest

Dw ew

B. Officers are prohibited from:
y using their official capacity to influence, interfere with or affect the result of
an election

 

2. assuming active roles in the management orgaiiization or financial activities
of partisan political parties, campaigns or clubs

3, serving as officers of partisan politi parties or clubs

A. becoming candidates for or campaigning for partisan elected public office

5, soliciting votes in support of, or in Opposition to, any partisan
candidates/issues

6, serving as delegates to a political party convention

ad initiating or circulating a partisan nomination petition

8. organizing, selling tickets to or actively participating in a fund raising
function for a partisan political part or candidate

9. otherwise engaging in prohibitive partisan activities as set forth in the State

Civil Service Act

Seetion 34.12 Smoking and Tobaceo Use

Members of this department, all swom and civilian personnel are prohibited from the use of tobacco
products while in the police building and/or in the police cars. This policy will also include whilein
the performance of your police duties.

A. Smoking area may be designated by the Chief of Police by a departmental order,
Section 34.13 Conduct Towards Superior Officers

A member or employee shall address superior officers by tifle or rank at all times while on duty and
in the presence of ath

 

A member or employee shall render the Proper respect to superior officers. The use of indecent,
profane, insolent or uncivil language to superiors by any member or employee is prohibited,

A member or employee shall not, under any circumstances, criticize or speak degradingly to other
members of his department or to persons ontside af the department regarding instcuctions, orders or
actions issued or performed by a superior officer.

No member or employce shall be insubordinate to any supertor officer or supervisor ar to one in duly
constituted authority,

 

A member or employee shall be considered insubordinate when heis unwilling to submit to author ity
or willfully disobedient to an order lawfully issued by a superior officer or one in duly constituted
authority or uses any disrespectful, mutinous, insolent or abusive language towards a Superior officer,
or supervisor or one in duly constituted authority,

Section 34.14 Violation of Rules and Conduct

A violation of any of the rules of conduct contained in this section or any other section of this
manual shall be sufficient cause for disciplinary action to be taken by the Chief of Police in
accordance with the rules and regulations af the Policy and Procedure Manual of the Township of
South Park. Disciplinary action may constitute the following:

1. oral reprimand

2. written reprimand

internal suspension

4. external suspension

5. extended probation

G. reduction in rank

7. dismissal from the department

 

Section 34,15 Removals

No persons employed by the South Park Township Police Department shall be suspended, removed
or reduced in rank except for the following reasons:

T. Physical or mental disability affecting his ability to continue in service in which case the
person shall receive an honorable discharge from the service

2, Neglect or violation of an official duty

27

<H ‘Violation ef any written rule, regulation ‘or procedures of the manual set forth by the
Chief of Police or Board of Supervisors

4. ‘Violation of any law of the Commonwealth, of Pennsylvania, which provides that such
violation, constitutes a felony

3; Inefficiency, neglect, intemperance, disobedience of orders or conduct unbecoming an
officer

 

Intoxication while on duty
7. Willful misstatement, falsification or concealment on application
A. Any time an officer faces disciplinary action except for an oral and/or a written reprimand, he

shall receivea departmental hearing before the Chief of Police and the Township Manager and/or
the Assistant Township Manager to establish any further action,

  

Note: An officer under review must have a union representative present at the hearing.

1B. No persons employed by the Police Department shall be suspended, removed orreduced in rank
on account of race, sex, color, religious creed, age, national origin or political reasons,

 

a

The Chief of Police or in the absence of the Chief, the Deputy Chief of the Police Department,
may suspend an employee in the Police Department for a period not to exceed thirty (30)
working days. The Chief of Police or the Deputy Chief of the Police Department may
recommend to the Board of Supervisors, suspension of employees in the Police Departinent for
periods in excess of thirty (30) days and may also recommend reduction in rank or removal,

All disjautes between the parties regarding the interpretation or applications of the provisions of
this manual shall be settled in accordance with the Grievance Procedure set forth in agreement
between the Township of South Park and the Union.

Section 34.16 Procedures Governing Emergency Suspensions and Misconduct Complaints

The following personnel have the authority to impose emergency suspension until the next business
day against a member or employee when it appears that such action is in the best interest of the
deparlment:

1. Any commanding officer as defined herein

ze Chief 7

as Deputy Chief

4, Lieutenant

a: Sergeant (concurrence with the Chief af Police or Deputy Chief in the absence of the

 

Chief)
6. Temporary Acting Sergeant (concurrence with the Chief of Police or Depuly Chiefin
the absence of Chief)

cD OIC Patrelmen (concurrence with the Chief of Police or Deputy Chiefin the absence
of the Chief)

A member or employee receiving emergency snspension slrall be required ta report to the Chiefof
Police on the next business day at 9:00 A.M, unless otherwise directed by competent authority.

The comrnand or supervisory officer imposing or recommending the suspension shall also report to
the Chief of Police at the same time,

 

Whenever disciplinary action is taken or recommended (except for oral reprimand) a written report
must be submitied immediately containing the following information:

|. The name, rank and present assignment of the person being disciplined,
2. The dates, times and locations of the misconduet.

3. A complete statement of the facts of this misconduct,

4, The punishment imposed or recommended,

5, The written signature and rank of the preparing officer.

The report shall be distributed as follows by the officer imposing or recommending disciplinary
action:

I. Original to the Chief of Police

2. Board of Supervisors

3. Manager

4, Copy retained by officer imposing or recommending the action
5. The appropriate Union Representative

The member or employee being disciplined shall be informed of the charges and penalties assigned
at the time such action is taken, Whenever any command or supervisory officer observed or js
informed of the misconduct of any other member or employee which indicates the need for
disciplinary action, he shall take authorized and necessary action and render a complete report of the
incident and his actions to his commanding officer,

Complaints by citizens against members or employees of this department shall be processed in the
following manner;

During normal business hours refer such complaints to the Chief of Police who will assign an
officer to investigate,

At other times, notify the Officer in Charge who will either receive and investigate the
complaint himself or instruct the Supervisor to investigate the complaint.

29

Tf, in the opinion of the Officer in Charge, the incident is of sufficient gravity, he shall notify the
Chief of Police regardless of the hour. In addition, he shall take any immediate action necessary to
preserve the integrity ofthe department until the arrival of the Chief,

The officer assigned the investigation of an alleged act of misconduct on the pact of amember or an
employee of this department shall conduct a thorough and accurate investigation. Such investigation
shall include formal statements from all parties concemed when Necessary and pertinent, the
gathering and preservation of any physieal evidence pertaining to the case and all other information
bearing on the matier. Alleged acts of misconduet must be investigated and the results of the
investigation must be reduced to a written. report in conjunction with the current police contract.

The investigating officer shall summarize the pertinent facts including:

1 An abstract “summary” of the complaint or alleged act of misconduct.

Pertinent portions of the statements of all Parties to the incident.

A description of the incident, physical evidence and other evidence important te the

case.

4. The observations and conclusions of the investigating officer.

5. One of the findings listed below will be included in the report of the investigation of

an alleged act of misconduct,

UNFOUNDED: The investigation indicates that the facts complained of did not

occur or failed lo involve police personnel.

4 EXONERATED: Acts did occur but were justified, lawful and proper.

8. NOT SUSTAINED: Investigation fails to diseover sufficient evidence to clearly
prove or disprove the allegations made in the complaint.

9. SUSTAINED: Investigation discloses sufficient evidence to clearly prove the
allegations made in the cornplaint,

10. NOT INVOLVED: Investigation establishes that the individual receiving this “Report
of Findings’ was not involved in the alleged incident,

to

te

 

 

 

Section 34,17 Procedures on Appeals

Ifanymember shall demand a hearing before the Board of Supervisors of South Parle Township ona
removal, suspension or reduetion in rank, if written answers to the charge are filed with the Manager,
it shall be the duty of the Manager to promptly file such answers, or a copy thereof, with the
Chairman of the Board of Supervisors of South Park Township.

 

Seetion 34.18 Contract Police Services

Future Reference

Section 35 In-Service Training
Section 35 In-Service Training

The routine training conducted within the organizational structure of the Sou!
Police Department, in-service train ng shall consist of the following:

 

Park Township

 

30.
Firearms Qualificatians

First aid training

AED quarterly training

CPR training

Training films

Departmental training session
ASP baton certification
OC/N certification

BAD Rete

In-service training will be conducted when possible on the officer's duty time unless othenwise
approved by the Chief of Police.

Section 35.1 Mandatory Police Training

 

The Municipal Police Officer's Educational and Training Commission was established to help
upgrade the professional police service in Pennsylvania through wnifonn training for police officers,
The training is mandatory and unless satisfactorily completed will cause the police officer to lose his
certification as a police officer. The total number of hours required under the mandatory training
Structure is adjusted yearly.

 

The courses established for mandatory training are standardized throughout the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the topics change from year to year,

All officers will be scheduled for the mandatory training classes and are mandated to attend and
successfully complete the prescribed course of study.

Section 35.2 Training Requests

 

Every police officer is permitted at any time to submit i writing to the Training Officer his request
to attend a schoo! or seminar to further edueate the officer.

‘The training request will be submitted in advance ofthe scheduled training date and will provide the
following information:

 

Name of the officer requesting attendance

Type of training seminar/class requested

Location of the training

Tuition costs

Cost and transportation or need for transportation

Room and board cost, if applicable

Date you will require leave to attend

Attachment to your request of a bulletin or flyer explaining the class, if available,

NAW Bw pw

ea

All requests for training will be evaluated on an individual basis and the current needs of the officer
or department with regard to the specific training you are requesting.

31

The Training Officer will submit to the Deputy Chief of Police, in wr iting, his opinion as to whether
the request is valid and further action should be initiated to grant the officer’s request.

Section 35.3 Responsibilities of an Officer Attending a Training Seminar/Sehool

1, Upon completion of the officer’s attendance in an approved training seminar/schaol,
the officer will provide a written teport of the highlights of his training to inchide any
changes in the law or procedures for handling specific situations.

2 The officer will duplicate any handout materials that he feels may be relevant and
important to be distributed to further educate aur officers.

st Tan officer attends a one-d ay seminar/school at a min: mum, he will provide a one-
Page type written overview of his course for approval and distribution to the
department,

4 If a training course is longer than one day, the officer will be responsible for
providing a one-page type written overview for each day that he attends,

5 Theofficer should be prepared from hi. training that, should he be requested to do so,
he will be able to instruct officers from the material he has obtained.

We are not able to send each and every police officer to school. So it will be the responsibility ofthe
officer who receives the formal trai ing to bring back and distribute as much im portant and relevant
material to his fellow officers,

 

Section 36 Drug and Alcohol Abuse - Statement of Need

South Park Township Police Department has a strong commitment to the health, safety and welfare
ofits employees, their families, and the public, Widely available statistics and informat ion establish
that the incidence of drug and aleohol abuse is increasing and that the effect is devastating to lives
and the public at large. South Park Township Police Department is concerned that due to the
potential for abuse among some of our employees, the safety of our employees and the general public
could be endangered. Our commitment to maintaining a safe and secure workplace requires a clear
policy and supportive program relating to the detection, treatment, and prevention of substance abuse
by employees,

 

Section 36.1 Drug and Alcohol Abuse- Goal

It is the goal of South Park Township Police Department to provide a safe workplace by eliminating
the hazards to health and job safely created by alcohol and other dvugabuse. We believe this goal to
bein the best interest of our employees and the public.

Section 36.2 Drugand Aleohol Abuse - Scope

This policy applies to all employees of South Park Township Police Department while on the job and
to situations wherean employee’ s off-the-job conduct impairs work performance or undermines the
public confidence in, or harms the reputation of South Park Township Police Department.

32
Although the South Patk Township Police Depariment has no intention of intruding into the private
lives of its employees, we recognize that involvement with alcohol or other drugs off the job
eventually takes its toll on job performance, Our concern is to assure that employees repart to work
in condition to perform their duties safely and efficicntly in the interest of their fellow workers and
the public as well as themselves,

Section 36.3 Drug and Alcohol Abuse - Policy Statement

1, The South Par! Township Police Department will not tolerate or condone substance

abuse, It is the policy of the department to mainta a workplace free from alcohol

and other drug abuse and its effects.

It is the policy of South Park Township Police Department that employees who

engage in the use or possession of illegal drugs or controlled substances, or who offer

to buy or sell such substances; the use of alcohol during work hours; or the abuse of

prescribed drugs will be subject to disciplinary action up to and ineluding

termination.

as Itis the policy of South Park ‘ownship Police Department to commit the resources
Hecessaty to achieve and maintain a drug and alcohol-free environment. The
department expects the full Support of this policy by all employees,

 

 

Nn

 

 

Section 36.4 Drug and Aleohol Abuse - Proceduy €

To provide a safe drug and alcohol-free wo king environment, the department will:

1. Establish definitive mles and regulations.

2 Provide increased awareness through training, education, and communica ion on the
subject of aleohol and other drug abuse.

Recognize that there may be employees who have an aleohol or ether dru '§ problem
and stand willing to assist in the resolution of that problem by encouraging
employees to seek help through employee assistance programs.

we

 

In addition, the South Park Township Police Department may take any or all of the following
actions:

ly Conduet aleoho! and other drug screening tests both Prospective to and during
employment,
2. Inspect persons and their property in our employ,

Section 36,5 Drug and Aleohol Abuse - Department’s Responsibility
As a responsible employer and member of the community, the department will:

1. Create an awareness in employees and their families of the impact of substance
abuse,

uw
iors

2:

Administer programs that consider employee rights, are positive in their intent, and

are within legal boundaries,

Support the establishment of programs to assist employees with alcohol and other

drug abuse or dependency problems.

4. Utilize all channels and resources available to it to educate and increase the
awareness of employees and the general public

5. Support local and national efforts to combat alcohol and other drug abuse and its

effects.

 

Section 36.6 Drng and Alcohol Abuse - Employee Responsibility
South Park Township Police Department believes that each employee has the responsibility tor

1. Report to work at all times free of alechol or other drugs and their effects,

2H Participate in and support department-sponsored drig and alcohal education

programs.

Seek and accept assistance for aleahol and other drug abuse related problems before

job performance is affected.

4, Support the South Park Township Police Department's efforts to eliminate alechol
and other drug abuse among employees where it exists.

us

Section 36.7 Drug and Alcohol Abuse Policy - Implementation

South Park Township Police Department will be responsible for establishing and implementing
detailed policy and procedures specific to its needs, in support of this policy. Each of these policies
is subject to central review for consistency with the department's policy.

Section 37 Policy on Employee Assistance Program - Statement of Need

South Park Township Police Department has a strong commitment te the health, safety and welfare
of its employees, their families and the public, The department recognizes that a variety of personal
problems, such as emotional distress, family problems, alcoholism and drug abuse, can be
devastating to lives and the comnmunity at large. Most people solve their problems either on their
own or with the advice of family and friends; however, the department recognizes that sometines
people need professional advice,

Section 37.1 Policy on’ Employee Assistance Program - Goal

It is the goal of South Park Township Police Department to establish an employee assistance
program to help and encourage those employees in need of professional assistance to use it.

34
Section 37.2 Policy on Employee Assistance Program - Scope

 

This program applies to all employees who are covered under any of the various health and welfare

programs to which the depariment contributes.

While the department has no intention of intruding into the private lives of its employees, we
recognize that personal problems may eventually take their toll on job performance, Our concer is
to assure that employees report to work in condition to perform their duties safely and effi ciently in
the interest of their fellow workers, themselves and the public.

 

Section 37.3

di Itis the policy of South Park Township Police Department to establish, implement
and support employee assistance Programs that will assist employees to resolve
problems, such as emotional distress, family problems, alcoholism, and drug abuse,
recognizing these problems may adversely affect employee's’ personal health, family
and job performance,

ltis the policy of the department to commit the resources necessary to support the
employee assistance program.

policy will not exempt employees from Job performance requirements,

mployee Assistance Program - Policy Statement

 

 

Section 37.4 Employ ¢ Assistance Program ~ Procedure

South Park Township Police Department employee assistance program will operate within the
following framework:

1. Einployee’s current jobs and future advancement w ll notbe jeopardized by using the

EAP’s services.

2, As with all health and personnel doc ments, the EAP*s recards will be maintained in
a confidential manner.

3. Where applicable and available, sick leave may be used for treatment and

rehabilitation on the same basis as for other health problems.

Supervisors and managers are responsible for confronting employees about

unsatisfactory as well as acceptable but deteriorating performance, and referring such

employees to the EAP when appropriate,

a Employees will be responsible for Correcting unsatisfactory performance and
maintaining acceptable performance,

 

Section 37.5 Employee Assistance Program - Implementation

South Park Township Police Department will be respansible for establishing and implementing
detailed policy and procedures, specific to its needs, in support of is policy. Each of these policies
is subject to central review for consistency with the department policy,

The South Park Township Police Department, being a function of the Township of South Park
Municipal Government, providing Police Services for the health, welfare and safety of the publicand
all residents of South Park Township,

Because South Park Township Police Department provides Police Service to the general public, it
cannot tolerate the threat to public safety of aleohol and other drug abuse by its emplayees.
Consequently, the South Park Township Police Department has a strict and emphatie policy,
communicated explicitly to its employees, against alecho! and other drug abuse, with stringent
remedial action for violation.

South Park Township Police Department will not hire or retain employees who use, possess, ot sell
drugs, or allow workers in the workplace whose nse of legal substances such as alcohol or
prescription drugs interfere with safety or performance. Employees are subject to inspection and
under certain conditions, ta drug and alcohol testing. Lf South Park Township Police Department
determines than an employee has violated its substance abuse policy, that employee is subject to
remedial actions up to and including termination,

Employees are subject to remedial action if it is confirmed that substance abuse is injuring job
performance, if they are unl awfully in possession of drugs, if they are exhibiting signs ofimpairment
from substance abuse, or they are involved in an accident at work that reasonably raises the
Presumption of substance abuse,

Ifan employee tests positive under quantitative chemical standards, or is found to possess drugs, the
individual must undergo a mandatory medical evaluation, [f treatment is indicated, employment is
conditioned upon accepting and completing treatment. Also, if an employee uses aleohal or other
substances to an extent that interferes with jab performance or safety, the individual will be relieved
of duly and sent home pending disciplinary action.

 

Because South Park Township Police Department and the ‘Township of South Park recognize that
substance abuse is a disease, it holds a constructive policy emphasizing education, prevention and
rehabilltation over punitive action. The South Park Township Police Department encourages
participation in recognizing community-based and supported programs for the overcoming of this
disease, Employees who seek treatment may use employer provided health insurance, which
provides access to aleohol and other drug treabnent programs, and the Township will not keep
records of employees who use these benefits,

 

South Park Township Police Department employees who seek treatment can contact the Peer Centact
Officer for a confidential referral to an Employee Assistance Contact. The Peer Contact Officer wilt
notify the Chief of Police.

Section 38 Drug Testing Poliey

‘The South Park Township Police Department has a legal Tesponsibikity anc management ob! igation
to ensure a safe work environment, as well asa paramount interest in protecting the public by

 
 

ensuring that its officers have the physical stamina and emotional stability to perform their assigned

duties.

The abuse of drugs or chemical substances is illegal and counterproductive to the good order and
reputation of the police department and will not be tolerated. Officers must have physical
coordination and unimpaired judgment to react prudently and effectively to the demands of the
police service.

Section 38,1 Drug Testing Policy - P rpose

This order states Police Department Policy relative to the use ofnarcoties, illegal drugs and the abuse
of legally prescribed drugs by any member of the South Park Township Depariment of Police and
sets forth conditions in which drug tests will be required.

Section 38.2 Drug Testing Policy - Definitions

>

The term Drug includes cannabis, narcotic » Or controlled substances as defined under the
Pennsylvania Crime Code Controlled Substance, Drug, Device, and Cosmetic Act.

 

A.

B. The term Drug Abuse includes the use of cannabis, narcotics, or any controlled substance, which
has not been legally prescribed and/or dispensed, or the abuse ofa legally prescribed drug,

 

9

Reasonable Suspicion Standards - An apparent state of facts and/or circumstances found to exist
bya supervisor, which would cause a reasonable intelligent person to believe the employee to be
under the influence ora user of drugs or narcotics, The standards of reasonable suspicion is Jess
than probable cause,

 

 

Section 38.3 Drug Testing Policy - General Rules

A. The use of illegal drugs, cannabis, ornon-prescribed controlled substances or the abuse of legally
prescribed drugs or controlled substances by a member of the South Park Town: up Police
Department is strictly prohibited

Violation of this policy will result in disciplinary action.

&

Refusal by a police officer to take the required drug test shall be considered insubordination and
will result in the immediate relief from his/her police duties pending disposition of any
administrative action,

Section 38.4 Drug Testing Po y -Mandatory Drug Testing

Mandatory drug testing is the submission of a urine specimen in order to test such samples for the
presence of drugs,

Mandatory drug analysis will be conducted only upon the approval of the Chiefof Police or Deputy
Chief of Police under the following cirenmstances:

Section 38,5

lL.

 

Based on reasonable suspicion citing specific instances when a member Was
incapable of performing his or her required duties or exhibited unusual work
performance measures and/or behavioral traits,

At any time during the probationary petiod as defined by the working agreement
between South Park Township and the South Park Township Police Union,

For counseling assistance Programs or as a condition of disciplinary action due to
prior drug abuse,

Prior to assignment to special Units, i.e, narcotics unit, investigations unit, juvenile
unit and traffic uni
Random testing twice each year for Personnel ass:
above.

When an officer is scheduled for a physical examination to returri to duty after an
absence of four days or more which norm ally requires a physical examination and the
officer has a record of excessive absenteeism

 

 
 

ed to special units as listed

Procedures for the Ordering of Drug Testing in Cases of Reasonable Suspicion

A ranking officer (Chief or Deputy Chief) will be notified by the initiating supervisor
of the circumstances leading to the request for a drug test.

If the request for a drug test is approved, the supervisor requesting the test will direct
a memo to the Chief or Deputy Chief of Police indicating the circurnstances of
reasonable suspicion which formed the basis of the request. If the basis for the
request includes infractions of the rules and regulations, a report will aceampanythe
request explaining the infraction

The memo will then be presented to the accused officer who will sign his orhername
to the bottom of the resort, indicati ng that they have readit. This signature willin no
way be considered an admission of guilt, but only acknowledgment of the fact that
the report was read. A copy of this report will be given to the accused officer,

An accused officer who refuses to submit to a properly required drug test shall be
deemed insubordinate and charges shall be preferred by the requesting supervisor or
other commanding officer and the acensed officer will be transported home.

Ifthe accused officer agrees to take the drug test, the officer shall complete and sign
the drug testing consent form. If the accused officer is unable to read the consent
form, the supervisor shall read it to the officer. A copy of the consent form willbe
given to the accused officer. The supervisor will retain a copy of the consent form.
A supervisor will transport the accused officer to the approved testing facility and
will stand by until the test has been administered and will then transport the officer
home, At the testing faci ity, the supervisor shall complete and sign the laboratory
request form for the drug test indicating the name of the accused officer to be tested
and the telephone number of the Chief of Police who is the person to be contacted
when the results of the drug tests are available,

 

 

 
a Upon completion of the drug test, a copy of all police reports will be forwarded
through the chain of command to the Chief of Police.

Section 38.6 Allegations of Miscellancous Drug-Related Activity On or OIF Duty

Allegations of miscellaneous drug-related activity which wouldbe considered reasonable suspicion
requiring a drug test include but ace not limited to the following:

Mlegal sales, delivery, manufacture, purchase, or possession of drugs and narcoties.
: Whenever the results of preliminary criminal investigation indicate a reasonable
suspicion to believe that the accused officer is involved in illegal drug-related
activity, or upon completion of the initial stages of an administrative investigation
which indicates a reasonable Suspicion to believe that the accused officer is
personally using illegal drugs or is personally misusing or abusing legally prescribed
or dispensed medications.
3 A reasonable suspicion exists when a person has a reasonable belief that an
individual is under the influence of a dmg or drugs which affect behavior,
supportable by direct observation, articulate reasons, and common sense. The
following in addition ta the other evidence of suspected drug abuse may giverise toa
reasonable suspicion to believe that an employee's physical or mental abilities to
perfonn assigned duties and responsibilities are affected by drugs,

a

 

Section 39 Outside Employment

 

 

A, Responsibility of This Department - Al members of this department who engage in outside,
secondary employment must understand that their primary responsi ility and obligation is to this
department. All members are subject to call-outs for emergencies, special assignments or extra
duty. When such situations arise, they shall take precedence over any outside employment,

 

B. Request - Distribution - Renewal

 

 

1. Request: Request for approval outside employment shall be prepared in triplicate on the
“Request for Outside Employment” form and submitted to the Chief of Police who
recommends approval or rejection. The request is then forwarded to the Township Manager
for review and approval.

np

Distribution:

a. Original - Department personnel file,
b. Photocopy - Municipal personnel file.
¢ Photocopy - Employee.

 

Renewal:
Employees granted approval of an outside employment request shall submit a “Request for
Outside Employment” form for renewal as follows

wu.

 

a Annually, by January 31 of each year,

Immediately upon any significant change in the specific duties outlined in the prior
request.

Limitations on Outside Employment - In no case may an employee accepi outside
employment in the following cases:

Si

 

 

If the circumstances of the employment are contrary to department policy.
Duties in excess of twenty-four hours per week on scheduled workdays,
Duties at locations where alcoholic beverages are served for profit.

Duties as bail bondsman or recovering bail jumpers.

3: Duties as a private sccurily guard within the borders of South Park Township.
6. Duties that result in a conflict of interest with the law enforcement
profession,

 

ES

Enforcement - Officers mustbe aware that their job performance with South Park Township
Police Departmentisa priority. If, during an officer’s formal evaluation, it becomes apparent
that an individual officer’s job performance is not up to standard, then the officer may be
required to decrease the amount of hours being spent or terminate their outside employment.

 

Section 40 Job Stewards
ection 40 Job Stewards

The Employer recognizes the right of the Union to designate Job Stewards and altemates, The
authority of Job Stewards and alternates so designated by the Union, shall be limited and shall not
exceed the following duties and activities:

A. Investigation and presentation of grievances in accordance with the provisions of the Colleclive
Bargaining Agreement.

B. Job Stewards and alternates have no authority to take strike action or any other action
interrpting the Employer's business
Section 41 Effective Date

‘The effective date of this Agreement for all terms, conditions and provisions contained he

be 12:01 AM. on the 15! day of January, 2018, and shall continue in force and effect until 12:00
midnight on the 31st day of December, 2021. It is further agreed that on the request of either party
hereto, the parties will meet at such time or times after July 1, 2021, for the purpose of negotiating a
new agreement to be effective January 1, 2022. The purpose of such early meeting is in order to
enable the parties to comply with the provisions of P.A. STAT. AND ., Tit, 43,217.3.

 

in shall

 

 

SOUTH PARK TOWNSHIP TEAMSTERS LOCAL UNION NO, 205:

 

 

 

Date: Il - 12-12

41

 
