..

HAMPTON TOWNSHIP

POLICE

2019-2022

LABOR

AGREEMENT

)

0

AGREEMENT

AGREEMENT entered into this day of January 1, 2019, by and between THE TOWNSHIP OF
HAMPTON. hereinafter referred to as the "Township" or the "Employer,"
AND

TEAMSTERS LOCAL UNION NO. 249, hereinafter referred to as the "Union."

WHEREAS, the parties hereto are bound by the Act of the Pennsylvania Legislature, being
Act No. 111 of the Regular 1968 Session entitled "POLICE AND FIREMEN-COLLECTIVE
BARGAINING" and
WHEREAS, a majority of the members of the Police Department pursuant to Section I of
Act No. 111, have designated Teamster's Local No. 249 to negotiate with the Township on behalf
of the members of the Department regarding the terms and conditions of their employment; and
WHEREAS, the parties, through their designated representatives, have bargained collectively
regarding wages and other conditions of employment; and
WHEREAS, the Union and the Township have reached a meeting of the minds on all of the terms
and conditions for a collective bargaining agreement; and
WHEREAS, this Agreement is intended to make certain amendments and additions to the
contract existing by and between the Union and the Township, so as to reflect the terms and
conditions and wages of a Collective Bargaining Agreement for the years commencing January I,
2019 and ending on December 3 I, 2022.
NOW, THEREFORE, this Agreement in consideration of the mutual promises and in
consideration of the following agreements by and between Hampton Township and said Union do
hereby agree with each other as follows:

)
-2-

)
ARTICLE I - RECOGNITION
The Township hereby recognizes Teamster Local Union No. 249 as the sole and
exclusive collective bargaining representative for all of its Police Officers within the
bargaining unit, as set forth below, with respect to compensation, hours of work,
working conditions and other terms and conditions of employment.
The bargaining unit shall consist of all full-time Police Officers of the township, but
shall exclude the Chief of Police, and School Guards, if any.

ARTICLE II - DUES CHECK OFF

A. The Employer agrees to withhold monthly union dues of the local union from the first

pay of each month of any employees from whom written authorization to take such
action is received and to send dues to the Secretary-Treasurer of the local union on or
before the end of the month for which the deduction is made.
B. A dues withholding authorization is to be voluntary, but once given it may not be
revoked until fifteen (15) days prior to the expiration of this Agreement.
C. It shall be a condition of the continued employment for each Police Officer who is
not a Union member to pay the Union a monthly service charge in an amount equal to
its members' regular monthly dues and assessments, as those non-members'
contributions towards its administration of these Agreement provisions. It is agreed
that this monthly service charge may be paid under a check off authorization by the
employee. This service charge obligation shall be prospective from the date of
execution of this Agreement.
D. The Union shall indemnify and save the Township harmless against any and all

claims, demands, suits or other forms of liability, to include reasonable attorneys'
fees, in defense thereof, that shall arise out of or by reason of actions reasonably
taken or not taken by the Township in compliance with any of the Article II
provisions.

)
. 3.

ARTICLE III ·WAGES
A. The wage schedule for the Police Officers under the agreement shall be as follows:

2019

2020

2021

2022

Patrolman Start

$50,671.26

$50,671.26

$50,671.26

$50,671.26

Patrolman I year + 1 day

$58,923.47

$60,101.94

$61,454.23

$62,990.59

Patrolman 2 years + 1 day

$67,516.45

$68,866.78

$70,416.28

$72,176.69

Patrolman 3 years + 1 day

$74,881.90

$76,379.54

$78,098.08

$80,050.53

Patrolman 4 years + 1 day $81,019.75

$82,640.15

$84,499.55

$86,612.04

Patrolman 5 years + 1 day

$93,097.23

$94,959.17

$97,095.75

$99,523.14

Sergeant

$102,403.20

$104,451.26 $106,801.41 $109,471.45

B. In addition to such annual salary, patrolmen and sergeants shall receive monthly

longevity pay in accordance with the following schedule and subject to the
following terms and conditions. A patrolman or sergeant shall be eligible for
longevity pay in the amount shown on said schedule starting in the month in which
the annual anniversary of his/her employment as a Police Officer for the Township
falls, regardless of the date of the month upon which said anniversary falls.
However, only continuous years of service as a Police Officer for the Township
shall be used in determining the eligibility of longevity pay.

LONGEVITY

)

Years of Continuous Service
5 years + 1 day
10 years+ lday
15 years+ 1 day
20 years+ 1 day

Longevity Pay Per Month
$100.00
$110.00
$125.00
$135.00

)

C. In addition to amounts due under Paragraphs A and B of this Article, employees
governed by the Agreement will be paid:
l. Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250.00) per year effective January
I, following attainment of an Associate Degree from a Community
College or an accredited institution in a field directly related to the
responsibilities of a Police Officer.
2. An additional Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250.00) per year
effective January l, following attainment of a Bachelor's Degree from
an accredited institution in a field directly related to the
responsibilities of a Police Officer.
3. Or, a total of Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) per year effective
January 1, following attainment of a Bachelor's Degree from an
accredited institution in a field directly related to the responsibilities
of a Police Officer.
4. Under this section, attainment shall be defined as certification from
the Dean or other authorized representative of a college or university
that the Police Officer has completed all requirements for the degree.
The actual presentation of a diploma need not be presented to receive
the bonus; however, the diploma must be presented within six (6)
months of completion.
5. Education incentive will be paid in a regular check by March l 51•
6. As an incentive, the Township shall provide a one-time signing bonus
of $1,000.00 to be paid to all Officers covered by this Agreement as
follows:

1. - First Payroll in January 20 I 9 - $500.00
2. -First Payroll in July 2019 - $500.00
7. The Township shall reduce each Officer's I employee's annual
pension plan contribution to the Township of Hampton Police
Pension Plan as follows:

1. •Effective January 1, 2019 - from the current total of 5% to
3%

)

2. •Effective January 1, 2020 Remain at 3%
3. •Effective January I, 2021 Remain at 3%
-5-

4. -Effective January 1, 2022 Remain at 3%

D. When no sergeant is on duty, the department head shall designate a shift
commander, and he/she shall be paid at a rate ten percent (10%) higher than said
Officer's base hourly rate.

E. Both the Union and Township recognize the importance of good and open

communications between each side for the effective operations of the Township
of Hampton Police Department. In order to foster this communication, Officers
shall attend up to four (4) staff meetings per year and be compensated at their
base hourly rate for the time they are at the meetings. Officers scheduled for a
normal shift during said staff meetings shall receive their normal hourly wage.

ARTICLEIV - TOWNSHIPRIGHTS
The Township reserves and retains, solely and exclusively, all of its rights to manage
the affairs of the Township as such rights existed prior to the execution of this
Agreement, or any other previous Agreement, subject, however, to the provisions of
this Agreement. Matters of inherent management policy when not abridged by this
Agreement, shall include but are not limited to such areas of discretion or policy as
the functions and programs of the Township, standards of services, its overall budget,
utilization of technology, the organization structure and selection and direction of
personnel, determination of the number of hours per day or per week operations shall
be carried on, the assignment of work to such policemen in accordance with the
requirements determined by the Township, the establishment and change of work
schedules, the right to make and enforce reasonable rules for the maintenance of
discipline, the right to suspend, discharge or otherwise discipline employees for
cause, the right to contract out work, and otherwise to take such measures as the
Township may determine to be necessary for the orderly and efficient operation of
Township affairs, provided, however, that such rights shall not be used for the
purpose of discrimination against members of the bargaining unit.

ARTICLE V - WORK WEEK AND HOUR REGULATION
A. The normal work week for employees working eight (8) hour shifts shall be five
(5) consecutive days in any seven (7) day period commencing at the start of their
work shift on their first such work day. The normal work day for employees
working eight (8) hour shifts shall be eight (8) consecutive hours in any twentyfour (24) hour period commencing at the start of their first such hour of work.
For employees working the twelve ( 12) hour shift schedule, the normal work
-6-

week shall be six (6) twelve (12) hour shifts in a fourteen (14) day period and
one (l) eight (8) hour shift in the same fourteen (14) day period commencing at
the start of their work shift on their first such day of work. The nonnal work day
for employees working the twelve (12) hour shift schedule covered by the
current agreement shall be twelve (12) consecutive hours in a twenty four (24)
hour period commencing at the start of their first such hour of work.
B. For employees working eight (8) hour shifts, overtime work shall be
compensated at the rate of one and one-half (1-1/2) times base hourly rates for
each hour of work over eight (8) hours on a single workday or forty (40) hours
in a single work week period of time. The base hourly rate shall be computed by
dividing applicable base annual salary rates by 2,080 and rounding off the result
to the nearest whole cent. For employees working twelve (12) hour shifts,
overtime work shall be compensated at a rate of one and one-half ( 1-1/2) times
base hourly rates for each hour of work over twelve (12) hours on a single
workday or eighty (80) hours in a fourteen ( 14) day work period of time. The
base hourly rate shall be computed by dividing applicable base annual salary
rates by 2,080 and rounding off the result to the nearest whole cent. Overtime to
fill twelve (12) hour shifts will be called out in two (2) six (6) hour increments,
using the Duty Overtime List. If an officer is off and wants to take the twelve
( I 2) hour OT detail, they will be entitled to do so as long as it does not violate
the conditions set forth in the contract regarding the twelve ( 12) hour shift
schedule.
C. A Police Officer called back to work before or after his regular shift will be paid
a minimum of four (4) hours of overtime for each such call back. It is recognized
that this provision does not apply to a Police Officer who works overtime
immediately before or immediately after his regular shift.
D. All overtime work which the Township regulates or assigns to any Police
Officer, except court and minor judiciary appearances, and including, but not
limited to any police or security function, worked in or out of unifonn for which
any type of compensation is received, either paid through the Township, private
contract, private individual or otherwise, shall be fairly offered and distributed
among all qualified Police Officers on a rotating basis. Officers will provide one
(1) phone number to be called when calling for overtime. The Officer filling the
overtime does not need to wait 10 minutes to contact the next officer on the
department overtime list. Officers who refuse the overtime will not be penalized
and will not move on the overtime list. Officers who work the detail will have
their name moved to the bottom of the Overtime List.
E. Employees' normal workweek schedules shall be prepared and posted at least
fifteen ( 15) days in advance and shall not be changed except in cases of
emergency or other situations beyond the control of the Township. Overtime

\

work assignments shall not be viewed or treated as changes in employees' work
schedules.
F. In establishing work schedules, except for workweeks of rotating shift changes
which may not allow it, the Township shall provide all Police Officers two (2)
consecutive off days in each seven (7) day workweek of each work schedule.
1. For Officers working the twelve (12) hour shift schedule a minimum

of eight (8) hours off between regularly scheduled work shifts shall
be provided as part of the schedule unless otherwise agreed upon by
an officer and the Township.
2. For officers working the eight (8) hour shift schedule the following
would apply. A minimum of sixteen (16) hours between regularly
scheduled work shifts shall be provided as part of the schedule unless
otherwise agreed upon by an Officer and Township. In those cases,
when an Officer is requested to work a shift with less than sixteen
( 16) hours off between that shift and the last shift in which he/she
worked, then that Officer shall be entitled to one and one-half (1 -1/2)
times their base hourly rate for that entire shift.
G. Compensatory time may be requested and taken in lieu of overtime pay, with the
consent of the Chief of Police. Compensatory time shall be calculated in the same
manner as overtime/premium pay, that is, one-hour (1) work shall equal one and
one-half ( 1-1/2) hours of compensatory time. This time may be requested,
accumulated and taken one (l) hour at a time or in any other combination. In no
event shall an employee be permitted to accumulate compensatory time in excess
of forty-eight (48) in any calendar year and shall utilize all such accumulations
before February 15, of the following year.
H. Officers are limited to working not more than five (5) twelve (12) hour shifts in

succession. Exceptions to this limitation may be granted at the discretion of the
Chief of Police or his designee, if extenuating circumstances are present. After
working sixteen ( 16) hours within a twenty-four (24) hour period, officers must
utilize compensatory time off to offset any hours worked in excess of sixteen ( 16)
to ensure that the officer has at least eight (8) consecutive hours off before his/her
next twelve (12) hour duty shift. Exceptions to this limitation may be granted at
the discretion of the Chief of Police or his designee, if extenuating circumstances
are present.

ARTICLE VI - HOLIDAYS AND PERSONAL DAYS

)

A. In each calendar year of these Agreement provisions, each Police Officer shall be
provided ten (10) paid eight (8) hour holidays or eighty (80) hours of holiday time,
as follows:
-8-

New Year's Day
Memorial Day
Labor Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas day

Good Friday
Independence Day
Veterans Day
The Day After Thanksgiving
The Day After Christmas

Police Officers will be required to utilize the accumulated days within six (6) months
after the date of the holiday or it will be lost. These ten ( 10) holidays plus the three
(3) personal days hereinafter mentioned shall be permitted to float with six (6) being
permitted in the first six (6) months and seven (7) being permitted in the second six
(6) months.

B. In addition to the ten ( 10) paid holidays or eighty (80) hours of holiday time, each
Police Officer shall be provided three (3) paid eight (8) hour personal days off or
twenty-four (24)-hours, in each calendar year of these Agreement provisions. These
three (3) personal days or twenty-four (24) hours shall be in addition to sick leave
and holidays and may be taken at the Officer's discretion so far as is practical. Any
Police Officer desiring to use his/her personal days or hours must notify the Chief
of Police of his/her intention to do so at least forty-eight (48) hours in advance.
Unless the grant of the personal days creates a scheduling problem (i.e.,
undermanned shifts), the Chief shall honor the request. Employees shall be eligible
for their personal days as of their anniversary date of hire.
C. Police Officers may sell back to the Township a maximum of two (2) holidays or
sixteen ( 16) hours per year at their straight time rate.

ARTICLE VII - VACATIONS

A. Eligible Police Officers covered by the Agreement shall be entitled to receive the
following vacations with pay at their regular weekly rate.

)

Years of Continuous Service

Vacation 12hr

Vacation 8hr

1 year

40 Hours

lweek

2 years, but less than 5 years

80 Hours

2 weeks

5 years, but less than 10 years

120 Hours

3 weeks

-9-

10 years, but less than 20 years
20 years or more

160 Hours
200 Hours

4weeks
5 weeks

B. Employees shall take their vacation time off in minimum units of one (1) week
for those officers working the eight (8) hour shift schedule, except that a single
such unit, five (5) days of vacation time may be taken in one day increments,
with the prior permission of the Chief of Police. Requests for any one (l) day of
vacation time must be made at least fifteen ( 15) calendar days in advance of the
desired vacation day, however, in all cases.

C. In the selection of vacation periods, priority shall be given to Police Officers
based upon seniority and length of service and in accordance with the following
format: Selection of vacation periods by Police Officers shall be on the basis of
length of continuous service, work requirements permitting, provided that in no
case shall the township permit more than three (3) bargaining unit members on
vacation at the same time. The procedure for the selection shall be: In the first
round on or before March t st , each Police Officer, based upon seniority, shall
select two (2) weeks. In succeeding rounds, the selection will be limited to one (I)
week. Eligible employees will be permitted to schedule vacations between
weekends or pass days on sixty (60) days' notice to the Employer.
D. In the event a Police Officer with one or more years of service is absent for any
reason, he shall be eligible for full vacation pay so long as, in the eligibility year,
his days of absence do not exceed the sick days and hospital days for which he is
eligible and is for any reason other than occupational injury, vacation pay will be
reduced to ten percent {I 0%) for each twenty (20) additional work days that the
employee is absent.
E. Each employee will be granted vacation based on the number of years of service
at their anniversary date. Each employee will be required to expend their
vacation within the 365 days following their anniversary date. In case of an
emergency, the Township reserves the right to extend the length of time in which
any employee must utilize his/her vacation time.

F. An employee shall be deemed to have earned his vacation and pay as of his

)

eligibility date, even though he does not take vacation nor receive vacation pay at
that time. Further, if the employment of an employee with one (l) or more years
of service is terminated prior to his eligibility date, he shall receive vacation pay
prorated in accordance with the number of months he worked since his preceding
eligibility date. However. if any employee quits his job without two (2) weeks
written notice, or is terminated for just cause, he shall forfeit his designated
vacation pay.

-10-

ARTICLE VIII- PROBATIONARY PERIOD AND REDUCTION IN FORCE

A.

All new Police Officers shall be considered probationary Police Officers for a
period of one (I) year from the beginning of employment. All new Police
Officers starting their employment on the same day shall be assigned seniority
according to their examination score received for Patrol Officers, i.e., highest
grade receives highest seniority, second highest grade, second highest
seniority, etc. In all other cases seniority shall be assigned according to the date
the individual first reports to work. A probationary Police Officer may be
summarily dismissed during such probationary period at the sole discretion of
the Township. If such Police Officer is retained beyond the probationary
period, he shall immediately thereafter be classified as a regular Police Officer.

B. Layoffs, reduction in force and recalls shall be pursuant to Section 3 of the
POLICE TENURE ACT, as amended (Act of June 15, 1951, P.L. 586, 52 P.S.
S 813).
C. All members of the bargaining unit will be subject to a physical examination
at the direction of the Township. Such physical examination will be made by a
physician, or physicians, designated and paid by the Township from time to
time.

ARTICLE IX - GRIEVANCE AND ARBITRATION

A. A Grievance Committee shall be established with the Police Department

consisting of not more than (3) full-time Police Officers.
B. In the event of any controversy concerning the meaning or application of any
provisions of this Agreement, there shall be no suspension of work, but such
controversy shall be treated as a grievance and shall be settled, if possible, by
the Grievance Committee and the Township in the following manner:
STEP ONE: In the event that a Police Officer covered by this
Agreement has a grievance, he she shall discuss such grievance with
the Grievance Committee first.

)

STEP TWO: If the Grievance Committee finds merit in the grievance, the
Committee shall file said grievance in writing with the Department
Head within ten (10) days from the date of the alleged occurrence. The
Grievance Committee and the Department Head shall endeavor to adjust

- 11-

)

the matter within five (5) days from the day the grievance is first
presented.
STEP THREE: In the event no agreement is reached in Step Two within the
said five (5) days, the Grievance Committee and the Manager or his
representative shall meet and attempt to settle the grievance. The parties
so designated shall meet and attempt to adjust the grievance in fifteen
(15) days from the date the grievance is presented to them.
STEP FOUR: In the event that a satisfactory adjustment cannot be reached
between the parties as stated above, the matters in dispute may be
submitted to binding arbitration. The Grievance Committee shall notify
the Manager in writing within five (5) days from the Manager's answer
to Step Thtee, that it desires to arbitrate the dispute and shall set out in
such notice the issue or issues in dispute and what provision or
provisions of the Agreement have been violated. The parties shall
attempt to agree on the selection of an impartial Arbitrator. If the
parties are unable to agree on an Arbitrator within five (5) days after
arbitration has been agreed to, either party may then request the
American Arbitration Association, or its successor, to furnish a list of
five (5) prospective Arbitrators who are residents of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania from which list the Arbitrator shall be
selected. The parties shall then alternately strike names (a flip of a coin
shall determine who strikes first) from said list until one (I) name
remains, which person shall be designated as the Arbitrator. The
expense of the arbitration shall be equally divided between the
Township and the bargaining unit. There shall be no suspensions or
refusal to handle work during the negotiations or arbitration. A
decision of the Arbitrator shall be final and binding on the parties to the
Agreement and the aggrieved.

)

C. Grievances within the meaning of this grievance procedure and of this
arbitration clause shall consist only of disputes about the interpretation or
application of a particular clause of this Agreement and about alleged
violations of this Agreement. The Arbitrator shall have no power to add to or
subtract from, or modify any of the terms of this Agreement, nor shall he
substitute his discretion for that of the Township or the Wage/Union
Committee where such discretion has been retained by the Township or the
Wage/Union Committee. nor shall he exercise any responsibility for the
functions of the Township or the Police Union. Since Article IX of Caption 8
of the Pennsylvania general Municipal Law, commonly known as the POLICE
TENURE ACT, as amended, provides for an orderly disposition of disputes
arising with respect to suspensions, removals or reduction in rank of any Police
Officer, it is understood and agreed by the parties that with respect to those
matters covered under the Police Tenure Act, the grievance procedure shall not
be available with respect to such issues.
-12 -

ARTICLE X - NO STRIKE CLAUSE
The Union, its Officers, agents, members and the Police Officers covered by
this Agreement agree that so long as this Agreement is in effect, there shall be no
strikes or concerted refusals to work or unlawful acts that interfere with the Township
operation and with the public safety of the citizens of the Township. Any violation of
the foregoing may be the subject of disciplinary action, including discharge.

ARTICLE XI - BEREAVEMENT PAY
A. When an employee is absent due to death in his immediate family, he
shall be paid a maximum of twenty-four (24) hours earnings at his
regular rate. Such twenty-four (24) hours will be any twenty-four
(24) consecutive working hours which must include the day of the
funeral. No payment will be made for any of the twenty-four (24)
hours which is a day which the employee would not ordinarily be
scheduled to work or occurs during the employee's vacation. A
member of the immediate family shall be considered as the
employee's mother, father, wife, husband, children, brother, sister,
mother-in-law, father-in-law, grandparents, grandchildren, foster
parents, stepchildren and any other relative residing in the same
household. In the event of the death of a brother-in-law, sister-in-law,
the employee shall be paid for the absence only on the day of the
funeral.

B. The intent of this provision shall be to protect an employee against
loss in earning. Thus, the maximum of twenty-four (24) hours in the
event of death in the immediate family is not a guarantee of twentyfour (24) paid hours off.

)
-13-

ARTICLE XII - COURT APPEARANCES
A. Police Officers shall receive one and one-half {l-1/2) times their base hourly
rate for each appearance on behalf of the Township, but not for each separate
hearing conducted during a single appearance before the minor judiciary when
such appearance is made during off-duty hours. The Officer shall receive a
minimum of two (2) hour's pay at one and one-half (1-1/2) times their base
hourly rate for each such appearance. One and one-half (1-1/2) times their
base hourly rate shall be paid for all time spent waiting to testify and for the
time spent testifying.

B. A Police Officer appearing in a court of record as a witness for the Township
shall be paid one and one-half ( 1-1/2) times their base hourly rate for the time
he is required to wait to testify and for the time spent on the witness stand,
when such appearance is made during his own time, he shall receive a
minimum of four (4) hours pay at one and one- half ( 1-1/2) times their base
hourly rate.
C. If an officer is scheduled for a court-related appearance between two (2)
twelve (12) hour duty shifts, that officer shall be required to use compensatory
time at the beginning of the second twelve ( 12) hour duty shift should that
court-related appearance extend past four (4} hours in length and result in the
officer having less than eight (8) hours off between the two shifts. Required
amount of compensatory time shall be equal to the number of hours that
require the officer to be off for eight hours prior to the commencement of the
second twelve (12) hour duty shift. Officers are still eligible for overtime pay
for the court time as long as they have compensatory time to use for the abovementioned issue. If the officer has completed a twelve (12) hour duty shift and
is scheduled for a court-related appearance the following day, and the officer
is not scheduled to return for another twelve (12) hour shift that day, the
officer shall be eligible for overtime pay.

ARTICLE XIII - ARMED SERVICE RESERVE TRAINING
Any Police Officer who is required to take time off from duty to report to
summer camp for training because he/she is a member of a branch of the Armed
Service shall be compensated for the difference between his regular pay and his
service pay up to a maximum period of two (2) weeks per calendar year.

)

ARTICLE XIV- GROUP INSURANCE
A. The Township currently provides a health care plan to the Police Officers which is
known as "PPO Blue option 11 HAS HDHP 1500/3000 deductible plan." The
deductible for this plan will be funded by the Township as long as the plan is
being offered to the bargaining unit, with the deductible to be funded equally in 3
payments to be made: (on actual payroll dates) as close to January 15, March 31,
and June 15 of each year as possible. In addition, the Township shall continue to
pay the premiums for life insurance (Group Term Life Insurance) with a $50,000
benefit with a Double Indemnity Clause. Any Police Officer upon retirement shall
be eligible to have the Township pay the full cost of his Health Care Plan
Premiums until he becomes eligible for Medicare Benefits, provided however, that
such retired Officer shall not be eligible for this benefit if he/she is employed by
another employer, which said employer provides hospitalization benefits.
However, the Township retains the right to change plans and/or carriers in order
to decrease costs or contain costs provided, however, the overall level of benefits
is not diminished and provided, further, that written notice, which shall describe
the proposed new plan and identify the proposed new carrier, is given to the
Bargaining Unit in advance of such change. The Unit retains the right to
challenge any proposed material change in coverage through the grievance
arbitration procedure.

)

( 1) Effective January I, 2019, and continuing through the tenn of this
Contract, all full-time Police Officers shall contribute 8.5% of the
monthly health insurance premium not to exceed (i.e., capped at) 2.5%
of the highest Patrolman wage rate, which contribution shall be paid
through bi-weekly payroll deduction.
(2) Effective January 1, 2020, and continuing through the term of this
Contract, all full-time Police Officers shall contribute 9.0% of the
monthly health insurance premium not to exceed (i.e., capped at) 2.5%
of the highest Patrolman wage rate, which contribution shall be paid
through bi-weekly payroll deduction.
(3) Effective January 1, 2021, and continuing through the term of this
Contract, all full-time Police Officers shall contribute 9.5% of the
monthly health insurance premium not to exceed (i.e., capped at) 2.5%
of the highest Patrolman wage rate, which contribution shall be paid
through bi-weekly payroll deduction.
(4) Effective January 1, 2022, and continuing through the term of this
Contract, all full-time Police Officers shall contribute I 0% of the
monthly health insurance premium not to exceed (i.e., capped at) 3.0%
of the highest Patrolman wage rate, which contribution shall be paid
through bi-weekly payroll deduction.

· 15-

Affordable Care Act
At the time of execution of this Agreement, considerable uncertainty
concerning the details and effect of the Federal Affordable Care Act (ACA)
exists. Particularly, ·the federal agencies with jurisdiction have yet to issue
final regulations concerning many of the provisions and terms of the ACA.
For example, a notice requirement concerning ACA's health insurance
exchanges has been delayed, and regulations which will define those ACA
health insurance exchanges have not yet been issued. In order to overcome
this uncertainty, the parties have negotiated this Agreement based upon the
mutual belief and premise that the health care plan and benefits being
provided to the Police Officers under this Agreement will be in compliance
with any requirements of the ACA concerning essential health benefits and
will not constitute a "Cadillac plan" for purposes of requiring the Township to
pay a 40% excise tax, and will not have adverse economic consequences to
the parties which are not currently known. In the event that either the
Township of Hampton or the Police Officers suffer a material negative
economic impact as a result of the ACA, or any regulations promulgated by
the federal agencies with jurisdiction thereunder, or any action taken or not
taken by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as a result of its concurrent
authority or jurisdiction under the ACA, then the parties agree to negotiate
over possible amendments to this Agreement to address said material negative
economic consequences in accordance with Act 111 of 1968, including
interest arbitration if necessary. The scope of any such negotiations or Act
111 arbitration proceedings shall be limited to possible amendments to the
health insurance provisions of the Agreement, which will address the effects
of any material negative economic impacts caused by the ACA, as stated
above.

B. In case of any employee's absence from work due to layoff or leave of absence,
the Township will not be obligated to pay for his insurance coverage beyond the
end of the month in which such absence begins. When such employee is returned
to work, his insurance coverage will recommence as of the first of the month
following his return to work.
C. In case of an employee's absence from work due to illness or injury which is not
the result of the performance of his duties, the Township will pay for his insurance
coverage for a period of thirty (30) days after sick leave terminates. When such
employee is returned to work, his insurance coverage will recommence as of the
first of the month following his return to work.

)

D. Officers who have an unused balance in their "MedSaver Account" shall be
entitled to withdraw such funds to be paid towards other Health Care Benefit
Premiums, deductible or Co-pays under any Health Care Plan then in effect, but
such payments shall cease after the exhaustion of the amount credited towards
such officer.

E. An officer who declines to utilize the healthcare plan because they are covered by a
spouse's plan, shall be compensated at a rate of $5,000.00 annually. The payment
will be made in accordance with the provisions of the Hampton Township Personnel
Policy Manual.
F. An Officer hired after January 1, 2019 shall not be eligible for healthcare benefits
paid by the Township of Hampton upon retirement. This does not apply to current
Part-Time Police Officer Jeff Cupelli, who upon retirement will have healthcare
benefits paid by the Township of Hampton.

ARTICLE XV - PENSION PLAN

A. The present pension program entitled "HAMPTON TOWNSHIP POLICE
PENSION PLAN" identified as Township Ordinance No. 705, as amended, shall
be continued.
B. The Police agree that the contributions to the Pension Plan beginning with the
year 2007 shall be in accordance with the MMO calculation under Act 205,
which is five percent (5%) of total police wages.

)

During each year of this Agreement,' the Township agrees to have a calculation
performed to determine the necessary minimum municipal obligation for the
succeeding year as required by Act 205. In the event that the calculation
determines that a contribution is necessary to be made by the Bargaining Unit
Members, then, the contribution shall be deducted from the wages of the Police
Officers, but not to exceed five percent (5%) of the total wages of the Officers. In
the event that the calculation determines that no contribution or a contribution of
less than five percent (5%) is possible, then the Township shall have an actuarial
study made to authorize a reduction in the amount of the contribution to be made
by the Police for each succeeding year. The cost of actuarial studies and other
expenses associated with study (costs, etc. but excluding legal fees) and fees of the
Actuary shall be paid from the Pension Plan. Nothing contained herein shall be
construed so as to create an inference that the Township has waived its authority
to allocate the amount of General Municipal System State Aid received by the
Township under Act 205. The Township will agree however, that in the event the
calculation of the actuary determines that the Police Employee Contribution to the
Plan shall exceed five percent (5%) that the Township, by its allocation, will
allocate to the Police Pension Plan no less than the amount of monies received by
it from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania regarding uniformed Police Officers,
(i.e., a 'value equal to two (2) units per Police Officer).
• 17 •

'

The Township agrees that it will attempt to set the employee pension contribution
from wages of Police Officers as low as possible on an annual basis.

C. As of January l, 2013, the term "normal retirement age" and all provisions of the
Hampton Township Police Pension Plan which address the nonnal retirement
age, was amended to read twenty-five (25) years of aggregate service with the
Township and has attained the age of fifty-five (55) for all employees hired after
January l, 2013. The modification does not apply to current regular full-time
officers currently in the employ of the Township or to the four (4) part-time
officers employed by the Township on September 1, 2012. They are: Chris
Finnigan, William Gealey, Carl Good, and Jeff Haus. This provision confers no
rights upon the part-time officers unless and until they become full-time officers.
Their years of service for pension calculation will begin on their date of hire as
full-time employees.

ARTICLE XVI - SICK LEAVE
A. Each employee hired before January l, 2013, and current part-time employees,
namely, Chris Finnigan, William Gealey, Carl Good, and Jeff Haus, once (if)
hired full-time, will accumulate one and one-half ( l -1 /2) day's sick leave per
month or twelve ( 12) hours sick leave per month for after the first month of hire.
Such employee will continue to accumulate sick leave at a rate of one and onehalf (1-1/2) days per month or twelve (12) hours for five (5) years or a maximum
of ninety (90) working days or seven hundred and twenty (720) hours.
B. Employees hired after January 1, 2013, will accumulate only one (l) day sick or
eight (8) hours sick leave per month, up to a maximum of ninety (90) working
days or seven hundred and twenty (720) hours.
C. The Township of Hampton shall provide Paid Short-Term Disability for each
Full-Time Officer and or employee per week in the maximum amount allowed
per law. The Township shall continue to provide paid short tenn disability
coverage for six (6) months when long term disability would take over.
D. In any case where a Police Officer has accumulated the maximum number of sick
days, provided for in Paragraph "A" above, in a given calendar year, and cannot
further accumulate the sick days he is entitled to for that year, as an incentive to
said person not to use the sick days beyond the maximum, he shall be reimbursed
at the end of said year for all sick days not used in excess of the maximum of
ninety (90) days or seven hundred and twenty (720) hours at the hourly rate of
said officer for each hour of sick time not used. The hourly rate would be the base
- 18-

salary of the officer divided by 2080 hours for the year. At no time shall the
reimbursement as aforesaid exceed eighteen (18) days or one hundred forty-four
hours {144).

E. Any Police Officer who is unable by reason of sickness, injury or disability to
perform his duties must call the Township office each day he is off two (2) hours
prior to the start of his shift. If the officer fails to call two (2) hours prior to the
start of his/her shift, he/she will be docked two (2) hours at his/her regular rate.
Sick leave cannot be used for doctor's office visits or treatments which can be
scheduled during non-working hours. After three (3) consecutive days of nonhospitalized sick leave, a doctor's certificate shall be presented by the Police
Officer in all instances. The Township may request a certificate at any time. A
certificate shall be presented by the Police Officer for each day of sick leave after
the employee has accumulated five (5) days of sick leave. After the fifth day, a
certificate is required for each and every day of sick leave thereafter.
F. Any Police Officer whose salary has been continued while he has been disabled
from a service connected illness or injury and who is entitled to receive
compensation for any source to which the Township contributes must return to
the Township all such compensation payments in that no Police Officer is entitled
to both his full salary and other forms of compensation paid for by the Township.
G. The Township shall provide a disability payment plan for non-occupational
injuries. All Police Officers shall be enrolled in the same plan which will provide
each Officer fifty percent (50%) pay after six (6) months disability.

ARTICLE XVII - UNIFORM ALLOWANCE
A. The Township agrees to pay each calendar year to each Police Officer a uniform
and equipment replacement allowance of One Thousand One Hundred Dollars ($

1,100.00) in 2019; One Thousand Two Hundred Fifty Dollars ($1,250) in 2020;
One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($1,500) in 2021; and One Thousand Five
Hundred Dollars ($1,500) in 2022, paid in the form of a Township check to the
officer on March 1 of each year. The payment is in lieu of any other maintenance,
uniform or equipment allowance.
B. Newly hired officers, who by practice in the Township are hired from the ranks of
part-time officers, come into the position as a full-time officer with a complete
uniform and equipment. In their first year as a full-time officer, they will be
entitled to the aforesaid replacement allowance pro-rated based on their date of
hire. For purposes of simplicity, if hired anytime in February, the officer will
receive 11/ l 2ths of the allowance in the first year, regardless of the date in
- 19 -

February. If they are hired after March 1 of the year, they will receive their
prorated allowance in their first pay.
C. The Township may establish uniform regulations and the Police Officers shall
follow these regulations when purchasing uniforms. The Township shall also
conduct inspections of Police Officers' uniforms and shall have the right to
instruct Police Officers to clean, repair or purchase replacement items pursuant of
the Township's uniform regulations.
D. The uniforms purchased shall be the property of the Township of Hampton.
E. In addition, the Township agrees to replace any article of clothing and issued police
equipment, damaged in the line of duty at no cost to the employee. To be eligible
for this benefit, the affected party must report the damage to the shift commander on
the day of the occurrence. The shift commander will then be required to certify that
the damage occurred in the line of duty. If the damage occurs while making an
arrest the Township shall promptly replace the damaged article, but the Officer will
be required to seek restitution ftom the actor on behalf of the Township and
reimburse them if successful. All issued items of uniform are covered, including:
uniform trousers, unifonn shirts, uniform headgear, uniform jackets, uniform coats,
uniform blazers, uniform sweaters, uniform turtlenecks, uniform dickies, uniform
ties, rain gear, uniform leather goods, shoes, boots, ballistic vests, uniform gloves,
sap gloves, flashlights, handcuffs, police portable radios, weapons (chemical,
electronic or lethal), all items of police uniform jewelry (badges, name tags, tie
clasps, collar devices, etc.), expandable batons, night sticks and blackjacks. When
directed to work in plain (street clothes), by the Township, the same replacement
policy shall be in effect, for like items of clothing and equipment. Items not covered
under any circumstances: personal electronic equipment (pagers, etc.). personal
jewelry (rings, necklaces, earrings, etc.), wristwatches and eyeglasses.

ARTICLE XVIII SECONDARY EMPLOYMENT
Secondary employment will be permitted under the following conditions:
A. The employment must not interfere or be a conflict of interest with the employee's
position as a Police Officer.

B. The location of secondary employment must not be more than one (1) hour's
driving time from the Township of Hampton.

)

· 20-

C. The Township must be advised of the location. hours of employment and telephone
number of the employee's secondary employment in case an emergency occurs, and
the employee's services are required.

ARTICLE XIX - NON-DISCRIMINATION

Neither the Township nor the Union shall discriminate for or against any
employee or applicant for employment covered by this Agreement because of race.
sex, color, religious creed or national origin. The use of the male or female gender or
nouns or pronouns of this Agreement is not intended to describe any specific
employee or group of employees but is intended to refer to all employees regardless
of sex.

ARTICLE XX - BARGAINING UNIT MEETINGS
The Bargaining Unit may conduct two (2) meetings per year for the purpose
of preparation for contract negotiations and contract ratification. It is agreed that
these meetings shall cause no disruption of police services.

ARTICLE XXI- EFFECTIVE DATE AND TERMINATION
Section l : Pursuant to the requirements of Act 111 , this Agreement shall be
binding upon the Parties hereto, their successors and assigns, from January 1, 2019 to
and including December 31, 2022, and shall continue in effect from year to year
thereafter, unless either Party notifies the other, by certified mail, on or before June
2, 2022; of any desire to modify or terminate any or all of its provisions.

ARTICLE XXII - ADDITIONAL PROVISIONS
The Township and the Union have agreed to the following provisions:

)

A. The Township agrees that no fewer than four (4) Police Officers shall hold the
rank of Sergeant. Thereafter, if a vacancy should occur by reason of death,
resignation, retirement or termination, or for any reason, the Township shall
have a reasonable period of time (not to exceed (6) months) within which to
promote a Police Officer to such higher rank in accordance with provisions of
POLICE TENURE ACT and Township Ordinances.
- 21 -

B. The following provisions shall apply to Police Officers who retire from service
as a Police Officer:
I. At the time of retirement of any such Police Officer (which term
will not include resignation or termination or death) such retiring
officer who shall have been employed prior to January l, 2000
shall be entitled to a buy-back of up to one hundred twenty (120)
days or 960 hours of available unused holidays, personal days,
sick days and vacation days which shall be paid at the prevailing
straight time rate, and shall be payable within thirty (30) days of
the effective date of such retirement. Police Officers employed
after January 1, 2000 shall be entitled to a buy-back of up to
ninety (90) days or 720 hours of available unused holidays,
personal days, sick days and vacation days which shall be paid at
the prevailing straight time rate and shall be payable within thirty
(30) days of the effective date of such retirement. In making such
calculation of the available buy-back days, only those holidays
which a Police Officer has earned (those holidays or personal
days which the Police Officer has earned prior to the effective
date of his retirement), and which such days, holidays, etc., he
has not taken or been compensated for. Vacation days shall be
calculated in accordance with the provisions of the first sentence
of Article VII, subparagraph F.
2. Any person who is eligible to receive benefits from this Pension
Plan shall not obtain a greater number of buy-backs than would be
permitted under the terms of the Bargaining Unit's labor agreement
in effect at the time of that person's retirement.

)
-22 ·

The Township of Hampton

Township Manager

/4/J~
President Of Council

Teamster's Local Union No. 249

~--<'JJ',;z
Teamsters President

Wage Policy Committee

Wage Policy Committee

Wage Policy Committee

Union Steward

0

s~ -

-.r2-.

Addendum to Township of Hampton-Teamsters Local 249
Hampton Police Collective Bargaining Agreement
Regarding Hampton Township School District 2hr Details
Effective immediately the Township shall allow the Hampton Township School
District to pay overtime for 2hrs from 0700 to 0900hrs on each school day and
2hrs overtime from 1400 to 1600hrs on each school day for a traffic detail due to
traffic congestion at the schools. This agreement will be in effect until June 15,
2021. The following provisions shall apply to all officers and shall only be for the
school district traffic details during this time period ending on June 15, 2021.

Article V Work Week and Hour Regulationis modifiedto provideas follows:
SectionC.
Officers working the Hampton Township School District Traffic Details will
be paid 2hrs Overtime from 0700 to 0900hrs and 2hrs from 1400 to 1600hrs
instead of the normal 4hr minimum overtime call out. This will be in effect for this
detail only and until June 15, 2021. The details will be filled using the seniority list
since the Department Overtime list is for 4hrs and more.

Townshipof Ha
~-

'"'--iill~l,;:·,,._
______

oc ner
Municipal Manager

Teamsters Local Union 249

?

CJ.A-

I d-(2

Union Business Agent

Hampton Police Department Representative

Union Steward

