COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
FOR THE PERIOD OF
JANUARY 1, 2020 TO DECEMBER 31, 2023

BY AND BETWEEN
THE TOWNSHIP OF
ROSS AND
THE ROSS TOWNSHIP POLICE ASSOCIATION

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article I

Term of Agreement

Article II

Definitions

Article III

Salary

Article IV

Management Rights and Residual Rights

Article V

Hours of Work, Overtime, Extra Work Details

Article VI

Shift Assignments and Job Safety

Article VII

Holidays

Article VIII

Sick Leave, Emergency Leave and Bereavement Leave

Article IX

Vacations

Article X

Uniform Allowance

Article XI

Grievances

Article XII

Life Insurance

Article XIII

Health Insurance

Article XIV

Disability Insurance

Article XV

Professional Liability Insurance

Article XVI

Residency Requirements

Article XVII

Pension

Article XVIII

Retirement

Article XIX

Miscellaneous

Article XX

Conflict of Interest

Article XXI

Drug and Alcohol Testing

Article XXII

Deferred Retirement Option Plan (DROP)

2

AGREEMENT
This Agreement entered into this 18th day of January, 2020, by and between the
TOWNSHIP OF ROSS ('Township" hereinafter) and the ROSS TOWNSHIP POLICE
ASSOCIATION ("Police Officers" hereinafter).

WITNESSETH:

WHEREAS, the Township and the Police Officers have engaged in collective bargaining in
accordance with the terms of the Act of June 24, 1968, P.L 237, No. 111, 43 R& 217.1 et
seq. ("Act 111" hereinafter); and,
WHEREAS, the Township and the Police Officers wish to set forth herein the basic and full
agreement between the parties concerning wages and other terms and conditions of
employment;

NOW THEREFORE:
For and in consideration of the mutual covenants contained herein, and intending to be
legally bound hereby, the parties hereto do covenant and agree as follows:

3

ARTICLE I
TERM OF AGREEMENT
The term of this agreement shall be four (4) years from January 1, 2020, through 12:00
midnight December 31, 2023.

4

ARTICLE II
DEFINITIONS
For the purposes of this Agreement, the following words shall have the following meanings:
1. "Police Officer" means any Police Officer appointed and employed by the Township in

accordance with the civil service provisions of the First Class Township Code, including
Police Officers on probation, and excluding the Chief of Police.
2. "Township" means the Board of Commissioners, represented by the Township Manager

or any other person designated by the Board of Commissioners as its representative, on
matters pertaining to wages, hours, and terms and conditions of employment.
3. "Continuous Service" means service commencing from the date of appointment to the

Ross Township Police Force, uninterrupted by discharge or resignation from the Force.
4. "Seniority" means the length of a Police Officer's service calculated from the date

of his appointment to the Force, uninterrupted by discharge or resignation from the
Force.

5. "Court Time" means any time spent at any Judicial proceeding on a case arising out of

police work (including magistrates' hearings and excluding only civil cases), where the
Police Officer's presence is required for the processing or prosecution of the case.

6. "Extra Work Detail" means any police work performed at the request of the Township for

persons or legal entities other than the Township for the cost of which the Township is
reimbursed by the aforesaid persons or legal entities.
7. "Basic Hourly Rate" means the base annual wage of a given Police Officer, divided by

2,080 hours, and is also referred to herein as straight time.

8. "Mandatory Retirement Age" means that all Police Officers shall be required to retire

from the police force on their 65th birthday. In no event may an Officer continue employment
with the Ross Township Police Department after their 65th birthday.

5

ARTICLE III
SALARY

1. Base Annual Wage: Police Officers shall be entitled to the following base annual

wages:

SERVICE
Patrolman – 1st year
Patrolman – 2nd year
Patrolman – 3rd year
Patrolman – 4th year
Sergeant
Lieutenant

2020
70% of 4th year
80% of 4th year
90% of 4th year
$94,820
$104,302
$113,784

2021
70% of 4th year
80% of 4th year
90% of 4th year
$97,665
$107,431
$117,198

2022
70% of 4th year
80% of 4th year
90% of 4th year
$100,595
$110,654
$120,714

2023
70% of 4th year
80% of 4th year
90% of 4th year
$103,613
$113,974
$124,335

Pay raises will occur on the hiring anniversary date for all Police Officers in years one
thru four of service.
Differential between Ranks: The base annual wage of a Sergeant shall be 10% more
than the base annual wage of a Fourth Year Police Officer. The base annual wage of a
Lieutenant shall be 20% more than the base annual wage of a Fourth Year Police Officer.
2.

3. Longevity: The longevity scale shall pay one third of one percent (.033) of the base

annual wage in the sixth year of service, and one third of one percent (.033) for each
additional year after the sixth year of service up to a maximum of 5.0% after twenty (20)
years of service or more.
Longevity shall be paid in a lump sum to each Police Officer in the final pay of December
of each year.

4. Educational Incentive Pay:
a. Each Police Officer who is able to secure an Associate's Degree in Administration of

Justice or Criminal Justice, and not less than 60 college level credits shall thereupon be
entitled to a special salary increment calculated at the rate of $300.00 per calendar year.
b. Each Police Officer who obtains a Bachelor's Degree in Administration of Justice or

Police Science and not less than 120 college level credits shall thereupon be entitled

6

to an additional special increment calculated at the rate of an additional $200.00 per
calendar year, or a total special salary increment of $500.00 per calendar year.
c. Each Police Officer who obtains a Master's Degree in Administration of Justice or
Criminal Science shall thereupon be entitled to an additional special increment calculated
at the rate of an additional $200.00 per calendar year, or a total special salary increment
of $700.00 per calendar year.
d. Each Police Officer who is eligible for educational incentive pay shall receive such pay
prior to May 1 of each year.

7

ARTICLE IV
MANAGEMENT RIGHTS AND RESIDUAL RIGHTS

1. The Township, in accordance with applicable law, has the right to manage all operations
including the direction of the working force, to discipline or discharge officers for just cause,
and the right to plan, direct or control the operation of all equipment and other property of
the police department, except as may be specifically limited by this agreement and by Act
111.
2. All benefits and terms and conditions of employment not modified by this Agreement are
to remain in effect. This residual clause shall not be construed to prevent the Township from
changing operations in the Department reasonably designed to improve the operations of
the Department except as specifically limited by the terms and conditions of this Agreement.

8

ARTICLE V
HOURS OF WORK, OVERTIME, EXTRA WORK DETAILS
1. Overtime consists of any authorized work in excess of 8 hours on any scheduled workday,
and 40 hours in any scheduled work week, including court time, and excluding only extra work
details. Overtime of less than 15 minutes in any workday shall not be included in determining
the total number of hours worked. Thereafter, overtime shall be computed to the next highest
quarter hour.
2. Overtime pay shall be at the rate of time and one half (1 & 1/2) of a given Police Officer's
basic hourly rate for each hour of overtime.
3. A Police Officer requested or required to work overtime will be paid overtime pay for a
minimum of four (4) hours. A Police Officer requested or required to appear at off-duty
criminal court or magistrates' hearings will be paid overtime for a minimum of three 3
hours. A Police Officer requested or required to appear for off-duty civil court time will be
paid overtime for a minimum of two (2) hours.
Any such minimum shall not apply to
any overtime that is continuous with either immediately before or immediately after the
Police Officer's regular shift.
4. There shall be no pyramiding of overtime.
5. Overtime or other premium paid pursuant to the terms of this Agreement shall be applied
against any overtime payments due under the Fair Labor Standards Act or any other state or
federal wage and hour legislation.
6. All general overtime details shall be divided as equally as practical among all Police
Officers on an annual basis. Whenever overtime is necessary for work on a specific case on
which a Police Officer is working, or to which a Police Officer has already been assigned, the
Police Officer may be given the overtime work regardless of seniority. General overtime shall
be assigned on a rotational basis, i.e., the Police Officers will be listed and asked to work
overtime in turn, as each one's name comes to the top of this list.
7. All Police Officers shall be paid at the rate of 1.5 x 4th year Police Officer's prevailing hourly
rate per hour for all extra work details regardless of rank. Extra Work Details shall be made
available to all officers on a seniority basis up to a maximum of twenty-one (21) hours per
month per Police Officer, with a bump period of seven (7) days prior to the scheduled Detail
Assignment. An officer may sign up for and work any open Extra Work Detail within seven
(7) calendar days of the date on which the Detail is to occur without regard to the officer’s
maximum monthly extra work detail hours or seniority. The Township may charge an
additional reasonable amount per hour to third parties for extra work details in order to cover
the cost of administration of extra work details of Police Officers.
9

8. A Police Officer who is called or required to work any overtime (including court time) may
at his option, choose to take compensatory time off in lieu of receiving overtime pay. One
hour of overtime pay shall be equivalent to one and one-half hours of compensatory time off.
Such compensatory time off may be accumulated to a maximum of two hundred (200) hours
off and may be taken any time subject to the approval of the Chief of Police or his designee
on the shift. If the officer chooses, up to eighty (80) hours accumulated compensatory time
off can be paid for in the final period at the end of the year.
9. When a Police Officer who is scheduled to work the midnight shift is also required to appear
that day in court on a criminal or juvenile matter (excluding pre-trial conference with the District
Attorney's office, excluding appearances before the District Magistrate and excluding court
appearances on any civil matter), he shall be permitted to leave work at least 4 1/2 hours prior
to the time he is scheduled to appear in Court, to allow him to prepare for his court
appearance, so long as the shift strength will not fall below the minimum safety standards
therefore under Article VI paragraph 4 of this Agreement. Any shift commander who refuses
to permit a Police Officer to leave work under this Paragraph shall file a written report with the
Chief of Police explaining the reason for his refusal. An aggrieved Police Officer may file a
grievance under the grievance procedure provided for herein. Under no circumstances will a
Police Officer be permitted to leave work under this paragraph if the workload is such than an
off duty Police Officer would have to be called in to replace him on the shift.

ARTICLE VI
SHIFT ASSIGNMENTS AND JOB SAFETY

1. Prior to January 1 of each calendar year, the Township shall prepare and post a shift
schedule for the calendar year which is fair and equitable for all concerned. In preparing said
schedule, the Township will endeavor to accommodate Police Officers attending school and
will attempt, insofar as feasible, to give such Police Officers their two pass days to correspond
with their school days in accordance with, existing practices. Such shift schedule will also give
each Police Officer two consecutive pass days each week with no more than five working
days between pass days except when the shift cycles are changed or to accommodate
schooling or by mutual consent. Officers shall be given preference in their slot selection
based on rank and seniority in accordance with existing practice as long as that selection is
not detrimental to police shift operations.
2. Although the Township retains the right to change shift assignments or schedules (subject

to provisions of Article IX Vacations hereof), it shall not do so arbitrarily for reasons unrelated
to the efficient operation of the Police Department. Except in cases of emergency, the
Township will give no less than fifteen (15) days advance notice of any changes in shift
assignments or schedules.
3. Shift-duty or assignments shall not under any circumstances be made for disciplinary or

punitive purposes. For the purposes of this section, shift or duty changes made to improve
supervision or job performance shall not be considered as made for disciplinary or punitive
purposes.
4. The parties agree that the Township has the right to determine appropriate shift manning

levels and that shift manning levels will continue to be maintained in a manner consistent with
the job safety of all scheduled police officers. It is agreed that such shift levels should
constitute the minimum standard for job safety on all shifts.
5. No Police Officer employed by the Township shall be given preferential treatment, nor shall

any Police Officer be discriminated against by the Township or person acting on orders of
the Township, or Township management, for reasons unrelated to the Police Officer's
performance of his duties or the efficient operation of the Department. In no event will existing
seniority practices (which apply to all Police Officers) be construed as preferential or
discriminatory treatment under this clause.
6. The Township shall endeavor to establish an in-service training program at least once a

year for and including the use of firearms, self-defense tactics, up-to-date law courses and
other matters related to police work. Police Officers shall be reimbursed by the Township for
all expenses reasonably incurred (such as books, ammunition, transportation, parking, and
11

where applicable, food, lodging and tuition) for mandatory school and in-service training
authorized by the Township.
7. Police Officers may by mutual agreement change shifts with one another for personal

reasons, subject to the Township's prior approval, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld.

8. On any shift, if no sergeant or lieutenant is working, the senior patrolman shall be

officer in charge of the shift and shall be paid at a sergeants rate of pay for that shift; but
it is agreed and understood that if a lieutenant or a sergeant requests to go home for
personal reasons other than sickness, and there is no sergeant or lieutenant working the
shift, then the senior patrolman shall assume command of the shift, but shall not be paid at
a sergeant's rate of pay for that shift.
9. Portable Radios. To the extent available, operating portable radios will be provided for

use by the uniformed patrol division scheduled and working on each shift. It is understood
that each police officer will be responsible for proper use and maintenance of this
equipment and will be liable for any negligent-damage or loss thereof, to the Township.
10. For officers hired on or after January 1, 2000, the scheduling of these officers

shall be at the discretion of the Chief of Police and shall not be subject to the
limitations of this article until such time as the police officer reaches his third
anniversary date. For any officer whose third anniversary date falls between January
1st and August 31st, he shall pick his shift/slot for the year in which his third
anniversary occurs in the same manner as prescribed in Article VI, Section 1,
however the Chief of Police will retain the discretion to schedule the officer until he
reaches his third anniversary date at which time the officer will be assigned to his
selected shift to take effect at the next full 28 day schedule following the officer’s
anniversary date. For officers whose third anniversary date falls between September
1st and December 31st, the Chief of Police will retain the discretion to schedule the
officer for the remainder of the calendar schedule year.

12

ARTICLE VII
HOLIDAYS
1. All Police Officers shall be entitled to the following paid Holidays during the term of this
Agreement:

New Year’s Day
President’s Day
Good Friday
Memorial Day
Independence Day

General Election Day
Labor Day
Veteran’s Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day

2. In addition to the above Holidays, each Police Officer shall be entitled to twenty-four (24)
personal hours each year. These hours shall not be subject to the mandated minimums
except no shift shall fall two (2) below the minimum. No personal hours may be used on days
listed on the agreed upon Blackout Days List:

BLACKOUT DAYS
•

All Holidays as listed in the CBA in addition to the following:

•

Christmas Eve

•

New Year’s Eve

•

Any Ross Township Community Day-Related Event Day(s)

•

Independence Day Event Date

•

Ross Township Police Fishing Tournament Days

•

Trick-or-Treat Day (Normally Halloween)

•

Black Friday (Day after Thanksgiving)

•

Township Emergency Events, to include weather-related events or Critical Incident
Events

3. It is understood and agreed that a Police Officer may ask for and take any such Holidays
and/or pass days subject to reasonable prior notice to, and approval by the Township. It is
further understood that the posted strength levels will not be reduced by the Township for the
sole purpose of any granting of such time off to any individual Police Officer.
4. A Police Officer scheduled to work on Christmas day shall receive time and one-half his
basic hourly rate for all hours worked on Christmas day.
13

5. In the event that a Police Officer does not receive the approved day which he has selected
as a holiday replacement, he shall be paid double time and one-half for the hours worked on
that day. If a Police Officer does not receive approval to take a holiday to which he is entitled
during any calendar year, the Police Officer shall be paid eight (8) hours straight time at the
rate of pay in effect in the year the holiday entitlement accrued within thirty (30) days of
December 31 of the year in which the holiday entitlement occurred.
6. Police Officers will be permitted to take holidays in four (4) hour increments.

14

ARTICLE VIII
SICK LEAVE, EMERGENCY LEAVE & BEREAVEMENT LEAVE
1. Sick Leave - The Township is authorized to adopt a no-fault occurrence policy establishing discipline
based on sick leave occurrences or patterns of misuse and/or abuse of sick leave with discipline being
subject to the just cause provisions of the Collective Bargaining Agreement.
a. Each Police Officer shall receive eighty (80) sick hours the first year of employment, one hundred
twenty (120) sick hours the second year of employment and one hundred forty-four (144) sick hours
per calendar year thereafter. Unused sick leave may be accumulated from year to year, up to a
maximum of two thousand (2000) hours. Once so accumulated, sick leave shall not be lost or
forfeited for any reason other than the use thereof by the Police Officer.
b. Sick leave in excess of three (3) consecutive days shall be granted to a Police Officer only upon
presentation of a signed certificate from the attending physician or practitioner. Any time the
Township believes that a police officer is misusing or abusing sick leave the Township may require a
physician's certification of illness or injury and may designate the examining doctor at the Township
expense.
c. An employee reporting off sick shall inform the Department prior to the starting time for the regular
workday, or as soon thereafter as feasible. Failure to so notify the Department shall be cause for
denial of sick leave with pay for the period of absence. Failure to produce justification and/or
certification of sick leave, as specified in paragraph "b" of this article, shall result in non-payment of
sick leave. Abuse of sick leave shall result in denial of sick leave with pay, as well as disciplinary
action.
d. If a person becomes ill or incapacitated during the course of his shift, he shall not be charged for a
full day's sick leave for that day.
e. A Police Officer who takes a full day of sick leave, either immediately before or immediately after
any pass day, holiday and/or vacation period shall be credited with having used up one (1) day of sick
leave for each one (1) day so taken, for purposes of calculating total sick leave entitlement, unless
within three (3) days of returning to work he produces a doctor's certificate. After the third occurrence
the Township may charge up to two (2) sick days for each day used in conjunction with pass days.
f. Officers shall be entitled to sell back one sick day for every four days accumulated upon
electing superannuation retirement. The rate of pay shall be the officer’s daily rate at time of
retirement. Officers shall not be entitled to sell back more than the total number of days earned
during the applicable pension computation period. Any days utilized during the applicable
computation period shall reduce the total number available for resale. Sick days sold back to
the Township shall be included in the Officer's pension calculation.

15

[NOTE: The revisions to the sick leave article were made in order to comply with the directives of the
Auditor General. In the event the Auditor General determines that these provisions are not in
compliance with the applicable law, pension benefits shall continue to be calculated in conformity with
the findings and recommendations of the Auditor General. However, if the effort to include payment
for sick leave during the measuring period is invalidated by the Auditor General, then the parties shall
revert to the provisions of Sections A and F governing sick leave prior to issuance of this award.]
g. If a Police Officer accumulates sixteen hundred 1600 or more sick hours and does not use
any during a calendar year, he shall receive sixteen (16) comp hours in the next calendar
year.
2. Emergency Leave
a. In each year, a Police Officer may utilize up to a total of forty (40) hours of his annual or
accumulated sick leave to take care of a family emergency, involving accident, illness or
hospitalization of the Police Officer's spouse or child. The terms of paragraph 1 (e) above will apply
with equal effect to sick leave taken under the provisions of this paragraph 2 (a), unless the Police
Officer produces within three (3) days of returning to work, a medical certificate or hospital record
indicating the nature of the problem justifying the emergency leave.
3.

Bereavement Leave

a. In the event of the death of a member of a Police Officer's family, paid bereavement leave shall be
granted in accordance with the following terms:
i. Five (5) calendar days in the event of the death of a Police Officer's mother, father, spouse or
child;
ii. Three (3) calendar days leave of absence with pay shall be granted in the event of the death of
a Police Officer's immediate family. The term "immediate family" means brother, sister, grandparent,
grandparent-in-law, mother-in-law, father-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, daughter-in-law or son­
in-law.
iii. One (1) calendar day of bereavement leave, which must be the day of the funeral or
internment, in the event of the death of the police officer’s aunt, uncle, or first cousin. In the
case of the first cousin, the police officer will be required to provide the name of the first
cousin.
If a Police Officer's holiday, vacation or pass days fall within the aforesaid calendar days, they shall be
included in calculating the five or three calendar days as the case may be.

16

ARTICLE IX
VACATIONS
1. All Police Officers shall be entitled to vacations with pay in accordance with the following

schedule:

Years of Service

Vacation

After 1 year of continuous service

80 hours

After 5 years of continuous service

120 hours

After 10 years of continuous service

160 hours

After 15 years of continuous service

200 hours

2. Vacation of less than 40 consecutive working hours at one time cannot be taken without

the Township's approval.

3. Prior to December 1 of each year, the Township shall send each Police Officer a form on

which he/she shall indicate his/her preference for vacation time for the upcoming vacation
year. These forms shall be completed and returned by December 31st. Vacations shall be
scheduled by the Township in accordance with existing practices and posted for the
information of the Department no later than January 21st of each year.
4. Barring emergencies, the Township shall not change a Police Officer's scheduled vacation

without his consent so long as there are Police Officers available to be called out to work
straight time or overtime to maintain minimum shift strength. If it becomes necessary to
change a scheduled vacation, for the reasons specified herein, the Township shall make
alternate vacation arrangements with him at the time of the vacation change.
5. Except where permitted by the Township, Police Officers may only take up to two (2)

consecutive weeks of vacation. The Township may require a Police Officer to take his third,
fourth or fifth week of vacation during the periods of the year when fewer vacations are
scheduled.

6. Full vacation for which an employee may be eligible shall be allowed in cases of termination
of employment for any reason except discharge for cause.
7. Except for Police Officers having less than one year of continuous service, the length of a
Police Officer's vacation during the current calendar year shall be determined by the length
of service of such Police Officer as of December 31 of the current calendar year.
8. Police Officers will be permitted to use vacation days in four-hour increments.
17

ARTICLE X
UNIFORM ALLOWANCE
1. At the time he is appointed to the police force, a Police Officer shall be provided with a
complete uniform at no cost to him. If items, other than wearing apparel, are supplied by the
Township, such as firearms, blackjack, handcuffs, etc., they shall remain property of the
Township.
2. Prior to May 1st of each year, each Police Officer shall be paid a uniform allowance of
$900.00. The allowance will be paid in either a gift card or included in the officer’s wages, to
be determined by each Police Officer’s preference. If a Police Officer’s uniform is damaged
in the course of duty, it shall be replaced at the Township’s expense provided the Police
Officer was not negligent in causing the damage. Any changes in uniform requiring new
purchases will be made at the Township’s expense.

18

ARTICLE XI
GRIEVANCES
1. A "grievance" shall mean any difference or dispute between the Township and any Police

Officer with respect to the meaning, interpretation, claim of breach, or violation of any of the
provisions of the agreements between the parties including all matters of discipline and all
disputes under the Pennsylvania Heart and Lung Act.

2. The proper parties to any grievance shall be the Township and the collective bargaining
representative of the Police Officers and/or any individual Police Officer.
3. All grievances shall be resolved in the following manner:

Notice in writing by the complaining party stating the grievance in detail shall be served on
the other party. Such notice shall include a designation of the person, named by the
complaining party, authorized to discuss the grievance, if someone other than the grievant.
A grievance must be filed in writing within a reasonable time after the grievant knew or
reasonably should have known of the events giving rise to the grievance.
Within ten (10) days of receiving such notice, the other party shall name in writing a
representative authorized to discuss the grievance. The two appointed representatives shall
immediately commence discussions for the purpose of resolving the grievance.
In the event that the two representatives are unable to resolve the grievance to the
satisfaction of all parties within fifteen (15) days of the appointment of the second
representative or within twenty-five (25) days of receipt of the notice of grievance, the
grievance shall be submitted to and resolved by binding arbitration in accordance with the
rules of the American Arbitration Association, except as limited by paragraph (4) below, and
the Arbitration provisions of the Pa. Judicial Code, as amended to date, which provisions have
replaced the Arbitration Act of 1927. The parties agree to abide by the arbitration award
which shall be final, binding and not subject to review except as provided for in the aforesaid
Judicial Code.
4. The arbitrator shall have no power to alter, amend, add to, or subtract from any of the terms

of the agreement between the parties. The arbitrator shall determine only whether or not there
has been a misinterpretation, misapplication, breach or violation of any agreement between
the parties, and specify the remedy therefore.
5. The costs of the arbitration proceeding shall be equally divided between the parties. Each
party shall be solely responsible for paying his respective representative or attorney.
6. In all instances, the parties shall make good faith efforts to resolve any grievance matter

prior to any appeal to arbitration.

19

7. Utilization by a Police Officer of the above grievance procedure shall not preclude him from
pursuing, either simultaneously or subsequently, whatever legal or equitable remedies are
available to him. The arbitration provisions hereunder, however, shall not apply when the
Police Officer has instituted proceedings under any civil service statutes or regulations, or has
applied for other relief to a court of competent jurisdiction.
8. The Township shall not be obligated to pay any member of the Police Officer's grievance
committee and/or the aggrieved Police Officer for time spent in processing grievances,
grievance meetings or arbitration hearings if such meetings occur at a time other than
scheduled shifts.

20

ARTICLE XII
LIFE INSURANCE
1. Each Police Officer shall, at the Township's expense, until retirement, be provided with Life

Insurance in the amount of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), upon which policy he may name
or designate his beneficiary. All such insurance is to carry a double indemnity provision.

2. Immediately prior to retirement from the Ross Township Police Department, each Police

Officer shall, at the Township's expense, be provided with a seven thousand, five hundred
dollar ($7,500) single premium life policy, upon which he shall have the right to designate
his beneficiary and change said designation from time to time, subject to the restrictions of
the policy.

21

ARTICLE XIII
HEALTH INSURANCE
1. The Township shall provide, at its expense, full hospital and medical insurance benefits
with cost containment (not resulting in a benefit plan reduction) for each police officer and his
immediate family, consisting of his wife and children, as administered by the Municipal
Employers Insurance Trust (M.E.I.T.) said coverage is referred to as High Option Select Blue
Health Program.
2. During the period of this contract, the Township shall, at its expense, also provide each
Police Officer with United Concordia Group Dental, a Blue Shield product, or a substantially
comparable product, high option family coverage and eye care family coverage.
3. Police Officers shall be permitted to remain in any or all of the Township's group health
insurance plans after their retirement. But, a Police Officer who so elects to remain in such a
group plan or plans, shall pay his and his dependents' own premiums except as provided in
Article XVIII, Retirement.
4. Each police officer with health insurance shall be required to pay 8% of the annual
cost of such coverage through pro rata monthly payroll deductions.
The Township shall have the right to change the existing medical, surgical and
hospitalization insurance to a plan which is substantially comparable as the coverage
being provided as of that date. "Substantially comparable" as used in this provision does
not mean "exactly the same." The police retain the right to grieve the Township's
determination that a plan is "substantially comparable." If the police do not agree that the
plan selected by the Township is "substantially comparable," the police will so state, in
writing, to the Township. In that event, the Township may not unilaterally implement the
proposed new plan; however, in the absence of agreement, the parties immediately shall
process the dispute before a neutral arbitrator selected pursuant to the arbitration step of
the grievance procedure for expedited determination. The expedited decision of the
arbitration as to whether the plan proposed by the Township is or is not "substantially
comparable" shall be issued within forty-five (45) calendar days of the police written
notice contesting the plan selected and shall be final and binding as a determination of
whether the Township is or is not authorized to implement the proposed plan.
An employee who is eligible for coverage under another health plan of health insurance
shall be eligible to opt out of the group health plan provided by the Township. The
employee will receive twenty-five percent (25%) of the annual cost of the plan paid
monthly, pro rata, for each month the employee has opted out. The employee must
provide proof of other insurance and is eligible to opt back in the Township plan in the
event of a qualifying event, as defined by carrier, occurs.

22

5. If the employer receives notice or information indicating that its health care plan costs will
subject the plan to the Affordable Care Act's "Cadillac Tax" excise tax, the employer will give
the Union written notice of that fact and the parties will immediately negotiate changes in the
plan design, plan and/or plan carrier in order to avoid the imposition of the tax. If no agreement
is reached within fourteen (14) days of the employer's written notice to the Union regarding
this issue, then the parties will proceed to an expedited interest arbitration proceeding in
accordance with Act 111. The sole purpose for that expedited arbitration proceeding will be
for the arbitration panel to modify the plan, plan design and/or plan carrier in order to eliminate
the exposure to the Cadillac Tax. The decision of the arbitration panel on this issue shall be
issued within thirty (30) calendar days of appointment of the neutral arbitrator.

23

ARTICLE XIV
DISABILITY INSURANCE

The following disability benefits will be provided to each Police Officer.
1. Short-Term Disability: In the event that a Police Officer becomes disabled so that he is
unable to perform the duties of employment, has exhausted all sick leave and vacation
time to which he may be entitled, and is not eligible for salary continuance under the Heart
and Lung Act, he shall be placed on disability, sick leave for the duration of his disability, up
to a maximum of twelve (12) months, and shall, for such duration receive temporary
disability sick pay at the rate of sixty percent (60%) of his base annual wage.
2. Long Term Disability: If at the end of the twelve (12) month period, the officer
continues to be disabled from performing the material duties of his police officer
occupation, he shall be provided long term disability insurance benefits equal to
66½% of his base annual wage, reduced by concurrent sick leave payments, social
security disability payments or other deductible income as set forth in the current
LTD policy. These LTD payments for disability from the police officer's occupation
shall not exceed twenty-four (24) months. At the expiration of the twenty-four (24)
month period, LTD benefits shall only be available and paid where the officer is
disabled from any occupation, as that phrase is defined in the current LTD insurance
policy. It is expressly understood that the Maximum Benefit Period set forth in Option
B of the current policy applies to all claims. This provision limits the length of
payments depending on age at the date disability begins.
3. Once an officer is off on LTD for twenty-four (24) months, and qualifies for continuing
coverage under the any occupation standard, the officer shall be deemed ineligible
for health insurance and other fringe benefits under the CBA. The terms and
provisions of the current LTD policy shall otherwise apply, and said policy is
incorporated herein by reference. Nothing in this Article shall limit the Township's
authority to discharge an employee in accordance with this Agreement and the
provisions of the Township Civil Service Code. It is expressly understood that an
honorable discharge on the basis of disability will not disqualify the employee from
entitlement to the LTD benefit.
4. In the event of the accidental death of a Police Officer, twenty-five percent (25%) of his
base monthly salary, not to exceed a maximum of one thousand dollars ($1,000) per month
shall be payable to his surviving spouse during her lifetime, or until she remarries, and in
either such event, until the youngest child born to or adopted by said Police Officer and
his surviving spouse attains the age of eighteen (18) years.
5. Once a disabled Police Officer presents the Township Manager a doctor’s report or
24

certificate indicating eligibility for either long-term or short-term disability benefits, the
Township shall promptly do whatever is necessary to process his claim for benefits. In
the event any disability payment is late, the Township shall promptly pay to the disabled
Police Officer the amount equivalent to the aforesaid late payment, and the Township shall
be entitled to keep the said late payment, the equivalent of which it has advanced to the
disabled Police Officer when it is eventually received from the insurance company.

25

ARTICLE XV
PROFESSIONAL LIABILITY INSURANCE
The Township shall obtain, at its expense, professional liability insurance, insuring each
Police Officer against the following:
1. False arrest, false imprisonment or unlawful detention;
2. Assault;
3. Malicious prosecution;
4. Libel, slander, defamation;
5. Improper administration of first aid or the wrongful failure to render first aid or wrongful failure
or refusal to provide medical aid;
6. Erroneous service or legal process;
7. Wrongful interference with rights in property; and liability for loss of, damage to, or loss of use
of property of others;
8. Wrongful interference with civil rights; and
9. Violation of or invasion of the rights of privacy in an amount not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000).

26

ARTICLE XVI
RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS
1. Police Officers shall not be required to reside in the Township. However, every Police
Officer shall reside in such a location as will enable him to report for duty within thirty (30)
minutes average travel time.

27

ARTICLE XVII
PENSION
1. Retirement Date: Any Police Officer after reaching a minimum of fifty (50) years of age and
upon completing a minimum of twenty-five (25) years of service shall be eligible at his election
to retire at any time thereafter until he reaches the mandatory retirement age of sixty-five (65)
years of age. Effective January 1, 2016, the pension plan shall be amended to provide for an
early retirement benefit in accordance with Act 600 (53 P.S. section 771(i).)
2. Retirement Benefits:
a. For Police Officers Hired Prior to 1/1/05:
i. Each Police Officer eligible for retirement shall receive a monthly pension benefit for
life, of one-half the "monthly average compensation" of the Police Office during the final
thirty­ six (36) months of his/her employment, as provided for in the Act of May 29, 1965,
P.L. (1955) 1804, as amended to date: 53 P.S. 771, subject to the approval of the Auditor
General; pension benefits shall be calculated based on W-2 wages. Upon the death of
a Police Officer eligible for retirement, his spouse shall be entitled to receive fifty percent
(50%) of the pension benefit to which he was entitled.
ii. Deductions from Police Officer's wages for pension contributions, if any, and
determination of monthly average compensation for pension calculation purposes shall
be based upon W-2 wages.
b. For Police Officers Hired On or After 1/1/05:
i. The pension benefit for officers hired on or after the date January 1, 2005, shall
be calculated on the basis of "salary" which shall be defined to include the officer's
base pay and other forms of compensation which are fixed amounts paid at periodic
intervals such as longevity pay, and shall not include any irregular or extra forms of
compensation such as overtime and court pay.
ii. Deductions from Police Officer's wages for pension contributions, if any, shall be
determined by the definition of salary stated in 2(b)(i).
c. For All Employees:
i. Retirement benefits shall include a Cost of Living Adjustment (COLA) pursuant to
the terms of Act 600. A survivor's benefits for spouses and dependents of officer
killed in service shall be pursuant to Act 600 as amended by Act 30 of 2002.

28

3. Vesting: Any Police Officer, who, for any reason ceases to be employed by the Township, after
having completed twelve (12) years of total service, but before eligibility for retirement under
Paragraph 1 above, shall be entitled, at his election, to vest his retirement benefits in the manner
provided for in Act 600 as amended by Act of December 7, 1979.P.L 475, No. 99; 53 P.S. 771.
4. The Township shall provide the Police Officer's collective bargaining representatives with copies
of all current actuarial and pension investment reports for the Police Pension Plan.
5. Each Police Officer who has completed one (1) or more years of service in excess of twenty-five
(25) years shall receive in addition to his normal retirement benefit, a length of service increment in the
amount of one hundred ($100) per month.
6. In setting employee pension contributions each year, the contributions shall be eliminated or
reduced on an annual basis only to the extent permitted by provisions and procedures in Act 600,
including the requirement for an actuarial valuation which confirms that the contribution can be
reduced below five percent (5%) or eliminated pursuant to the provisions of Act 600, 53 P.S. 772. It is
the intent of this provision that the pension benefits for the Police Officers be funded each year
without any contribution by the Township. The Township shall not be required to make any
contribution to the Police Pension Plan except as required by law.
In the event contributions to the pension plan are required, the police shall contribute to the maximum
permitted under Act 600 before the municipality shall be required to contribute any amount. No
interpretation of this agreement shall prevent the Township from using state funds earned through
unit credits for the police toward the non-uniformed employees' pension plan provided, however, that
no contribution from the police may be required in any year unless full unit value attributable to the
police in that year has been allocated to the police pension plan.
7. Officers shall have the right to buy back military time pursuant to Act 600.

29

ARTICLE XVIII
RETIREMENT

1. For all Police Officers hired prior to January 1, 2012, the Township agrees to pay Two
Hundred Dollars ($200) per month to a retired Police officer for the purpose of providing for the
Police officer's own post-retirement health care. This amount shall be paid to the retired Police
officer until the officer is eligible for Medicare.

30

ARTICLE XIX
MISCELLANEOUS
1. The Township agrees to provide a special office for Police Officers which would include a

desk, chair, telephone and computer.

2. Any pronoun or other designation in this Agreement which denotes the masculine

gender is used for convenience and shall be construed to include other designations
denoting the feminine gender.
3. If any economic benefit provided under the terms of this Agreement shall be deemed

unlawful and/or unenforceable by the Township and/or any court, the Police Officers shall be
entitled to a fair economic equivalent of the lost benefit, to be arrived at by mutual agreement
between the Township and the Police Officers; or, if they are unable to agree, their dispute
as to what is a fair, economic equivalent shall be resolved in binding arbitration under the
terms of the Arbitration provisions of the Judicial Code as amended to date, which provisions
have replaced the Arbitration Act of 1927.
4. Police Patch - The Township shall pay the cost of the design, manufacturing and the sewing
of the new Ross Township Police shoulder patch.

31

ARTICLE XX
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
1. No Police Officer shall engage in off-duty employment which presents a material conflict,
actual or potential, with his duties and responsibilities as a Ross Township Police Officer,
including without limitation, engaging in employment or business activities involving the sale
or distribution of alcoholic beverages, bail bond agencies, investigative work for insurance
agencies, investigative work for private criminal defense attorneys or litigants, or debt
collective activities. The parties agree that constable duties for District Magistrates outside
Ross Township do not involve such a conflict of interest.
2. No Police Officer shall engage in any off-duty employment which physically or mentally

exhausts him to the point of adversely affecting his job performance.

3. No Police Officer shall engage in any off-duty employment which reflects adversely upon

the integrity, good name, or reputation of the Ross Township Police department or which
adversely affects the Department's operations or efficiency.
4. No Police Officer shall wear the uniform of the Ross Township Police Department while
engaged in off-duty employment for third parties without obtaining the Township's express
prior approval. Extra work details, as defined in this Agreement, are not deemed "off-duty
employment for third parties" for purposes of this Paragraph.

32

ARTICLE XXI
DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING
1. The Township may test for drug and alcohol usage as per the model policy of the North

Hills Council of Governments.

33

ARTICLE XXII
Deferred Retirement Option Plan (DROP)
Section 1 Definitions
DROP - The Deferred Retirement Option Plan created as an optional form of
benefit under the existing Ross Township Police Pension Plan.
DROP Account - Third party investment account.
Member - A full-time Ross Township Police Officer covered by the plan.
Participant - A member who is eligible for normal retirement and who has
elected to participate in the DROP program.
Plan - The Ross Township Police Pension Plan adopted pursuant to Act 600.

Section 2 DROP Provisions
(A)

Eligibility. Effective January 1, 2008, members of the Ross Township Police

Association bargaining unit that have not retired prior to the implementation of the DROP
Program, may enter into the DROP on the first day of any month following the attainment
of age 50 and the completion of 25 or more years of credited service with Ross
Township.

(B)

Written Election. An eligible Member of the Plan electing to participate in the

DROP program must complete and execute a "DROP Election Form" prepared by the
Ross Township Manager and/or the plan administrator, which shall evidence the
Member's participation in the DROP program, and document the Participant's rights and
obligations under the DROP. The form must be signed by the Member and the Chief
34

Administrative Officer of the Plan and submitted to Ross Township, within 30 days of
the date on which the member wishes the DROP election to be effective. The DROP
Election Form shall include an irrevocable notice to Ross Township by the Member that
the Member shall terminate from employment with the Ross Township Police
Department effective on a specific date three (3) years from the effective date of the
DROP election. In addition, all retirement documents required by the Ross Township
Police Pension Plan Administrator must be filed and presented to the Ross Township
Commissioners for approval of retirement and commencement of the monthly pension
benefit. Once the retirement application has been approved by the Commissioners, it
shall become irrevocable.
After a Member enters the DROP program, contributions to the pension plan by
the Participant and the Township will cease, and the amount of the monthly benefits will
be frozen except for any applicable cost-of-living adjustment (COLA) increases awarded to
all pension recipients.
Members shall be advised to consult a Tax Advisor of their choice, prior to
considering the DROP program, as there may be serious tax implications and/or
consequences to participating in the DROP program.

(C)

Limitation on Pension Accrual. After the effective date of the DROP election,

the Participant shall no longer earn or accrue additional years of continuous service
for pension purposes.

(D)

Benefit Calculation. For all Plan purposes, continuous service of a Member

35

participating in the DROP program shall remain as it existed on the effective date of
commencement of participation in the DROP program. Service thereafter shall not be
recognized or used for the calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the
Ross Township Police Pension Plan. The average monthly pay of the Member for
pension calculation purposes shall remain as it existed on the effective date of
commencement of participation in the DROP program. Earnings or increases in earnings
thereafter shall not be recognized or used for the calculation or determination of any
benefits payable by the Plan. The pension benefit payable to the Participants shall
increase only as a result of Cost-of­ Living Adjustments (COLAs), effective on or after the
date of the Member's participation in the DROP program.

(E)

Payments to DROP Account. The monthly retirement benefits that would have

been payable had the member elected to cease employment and receive a normal
retirement benefit shall, upon the Member commencing participation in the DROP
program, be credited on the first day of each month into an Individual DROP investment
account. The account shall be managed by a third-party Administrator independent of
Ross Township. Each member shall select the investments in his/her individual
investment account from an array of options as selected by the Plan Administrator. The
Plan Administrator will select a third party to provide mutual fund or other investment
options, record-keeping and reporting to the members of the Ross Township Board of
Commissioners. All investment and administrative costs shall be charged against the
individual DROP investment accounts of the participants.
36

(F)

Early Termination. A Participant may withdraw from the DROP program at any

time and effectuate a complete retirement from service. No penalty shall be imposed for
early termination of DROP participation. However, the Participant shall not be permitted
to make any withdrawals from the DROP Account until DROP participation has ended.

(G)

Payout. Upon the termination date set forth in the DROP Election Form or on

such date as the Participant withdraws or is terminated from the DROP program, if
earlier, the normal retirement benefits payable to the Participant or the Participant's
beneficiary, if applicable, shall be paid directly to the Participant or beneficiary and shall
no longer be credited to the DROP Account. Within thirty (30) days following the actual
termination of a Participant's employment with Ross Township, the Participant shall
choose one of the following options:
(1) A full and lump-sum distribution
(2) Rollover to another qualified retirement plan (as permitted by law) or to an IRA
(3) Purchase an annuity
(4) Keep the monies in the individual DROP investment account. Monies kept in

the Individual DROP Investment Account may be withdrawn in any manner
desired by the member
(5) Any other distribution permitted by the Pension Board/third Party Administrator

(H)

Death. If a Participant dies before the DROP Account balance is paid, the

Participant's beneficiary under Act 600 shall have the same rights as the Participant to
withdraw the DROP Account balance. The monthly benefit credited to the Participant's
37

DROP Account during the month of the Participant's death shall be the final monthly
benefit for DROP participation.
(I)

Killed-In-Service Survivor Benefit. If a Participant is killed in service, the

Participant's beneficiaries under Act 600 shall be entitled to apply for and receive a
recalculation for payment of survivor benefits at 100% of the Participant's salary as fixed
at the date of retirement.
(J)

Amendment. Any amendments to the DROP Ordinance shall be consistent

with the provisions covering deferred retirement option plans set forth in any applicable
collective bargaining agreement or state or federal law, and shall be binding upon all
future Participants and upon all Participants who have balances in their DROP
Accounts.

Section 3 Effective Date. The Effective Date of the DROP program will be January
1, 2008.

Section 4 Severability. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be severable, and if
any of its provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional or illegal, the validity of any
of the remaining provisions of this Ordinance shall not be affected thereby. It is hereby
expressly declared as the intent of Ross Township that this Ordinance has been
adopted as if such unconstitutional or illegal provision or provisions had not been
included herein.
38

Section 5 Pending Legislation. In the event of the passage of legislation governing
DROPs in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, this Ordinance shall be amended to
comply with any new legal requirements set forth in such legislation. The application
of any amendments to police officers actively employed as of the effective date of
any such legislation shall be governed by and consistent with constitutional principles
applicable to the pension and retirement benefits.

In the event that extending this benefit to the police officers is determined to be
unenforceable, as an alternative to this provision, Article XIII Health Insurance
number 4 (requiring monthly employee health insurance contributions) shall be
eliminated.

39

IN WITNESS WHEREOF the parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be duly
executed by their respective officers and affix their hands and seals this

day

of January, 2020.

ATTEST

Ross Township Police Association

(Name)

By: ____________________________
Jonathan Killmeyer,
President

ATTEST

Township of Ross

Ronald Borczyk
Manager

By: ___________________________
Stephen L. Korbel, Esq.,
President, Board of Commissioners

40

