Township ofFindlay 

Me111ora11du111 ofUnderstanding 

between The Tow11ship ofFi11dlay and the Findlay Tow11ship Police Departme,it Wage a11d Policy U11it 
Ja11uary 1, 2017 through December 31, 2021 

Preamble: n1is Memorandum ofUnderstanding is entered into by and between the Township ofFindlay andthe Findlay Township Police Department Wage and Policy Unit. 
Table ofContents 
SECTION 
ARTICLE I 
ARTICLE II 
ARTICLE III 
ARTICLE IV 
ARTICLEV 
ARTICLE VI 
ARTICLE VII 
ARTICLE VIII 
ARTICLE IX 
ARTICLEX 
ARTICLE XI ARTICLE XII 
ARTICLE XIII ARTICLE XIV ARTICLE XV ARTICLE XVI ARTICLE XVII ARTICLE XVIII ARTICLE XIX ARTICLE XX ARTICLEXXI ARTICLE XXII ARTICLE XXIII ARTICLE XXIV ARTICLEXXV ARTI CLE XXVI ARTICLE XXVII ARTI CLE XXVIII 
PAGE
TITLE RECOGNITION 3 TERM 3 DEFINITIONS 3 SALARIES 5 HOURS OF WORK 7 USE OF PRIVATE AUTOMOBILES 8 HOLIDAYS 8 VACATIONS 8 UNIFORM AND EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE 10 ACCIDENT AND SICKNESS DISABILITY INCOME 10 INSURANCE LIABILITY 10 HOSPITALIZATION AND OTHER INSURANCE GROUP 11 INSURANCE HOSPITALIZATION AND MEDICAL INSURANCE VISION PLAN 12 SICK LEAVE 12 TIME SPENT IN COURT 13 LEGAL EXPENSES 14 SCHOOLS 14 LONGEVITY PAY 14 OVERTIME BY SENIORITY 15 PENSIONS 15 PAST POLICIES AND PRACTICES 16 PAYDAYS 17 BEREAVEMENT LEAVE 17 AMMUNITION 17 EDUCATION INCENTIVE 17 PROBATIONARY PATROL OFFICERS 18 CALEA CLAUSE 18 INVALIDATION CLAUSE 19 



Township ofFindlay 
ARTICLE I -RECOGNITION 
The township ofFindlay hereby recognizes the Findlay Township Police Department Wage and Policy Unit as the exclusive bargaining representative for all its employees on Police Officer positions. 
ARTICLE II-TERM 
This agreement shall be effective from January 1, 2017 through December 31, 2022. Included within the contract period is a re-opener in 2020 for wage increments concerning years 2021 and 2022. Ifthe Cadillac Tax goes into effect January 1, 2020, the parties agree to re-open negotiations on the limited issue ofthe Cadillac Tax. 
ARTICLE III -DEFINITIONS 
The following tenns shall apply to persons employed as Police Officers in the Township of Findlay: 
A. "Police Officer" shall mean only full-time Township Police Officers, (including those on a probationary status), but excluding the ChiefofPolice, except in Articles XI and XVI concerning liability, false arrest insurance and legal expenses which also covers part-time officers. 
B. "Part-Time Police Officer" shall mean a police officer who shares the same duties and responsibilities as a full time Police Officer and is scheduled less than forty (40) per week. 
C. "Senior Police Officer" shall mean any Police Officer with over three (3) years ofservice and having no rank. 
D. "Base Wage Rate" means a given Police Officer's base annual wage divided by 2,080 hours. It is also referred to herein as "straight time rate". 
E. "Overtime Pay" means pay at an hourly rate oftime and one-halfofa given Police Officer's base wage rate. 
F. "Court Time" means any time except magisterial court time spent at any judicial proceedings arising out ofpolice work (excepting civil cases) where the Police Officer's presence is required for processing or prosecution ofthe case. 
G. "Magisterial Court Time" means any time spent at any magisterial court proceeding arising out ofpolice work (excepting civil cases) where the Police Officer's presence is required for processing or prosecution ofthe case. 
H. "Detective" means any full-time Police Officer who is assigned primarily to investigation. 
I. "Canine Handler" means any full-time Police Officer who is assigned primarily to the canine "K-9" function. 
ARTICLE IV -SALARIES 
Basic annual salary rates shall be established based on years ofincumbency service as follows: 
Effective Ja11uary 1, 2017, tf,e base a1111ua/ wage i11cludes a (3.5%) rate i11crease. 
SERVICE Part Time 
Up to one (1) year 
Up to two (2) years Up to three (3) years Over three (3) years (Senior Police Officer) Detective Function OIC 1 Function Function OIC 2 Functions Sergeant Captain HOURLY RATE 
$29.15 $33.25 $37.74 $42.24 $44.93 
$46.73 $47.18 $49.42 $50.31 $55.34 
Effective Ja11uary 1, 2018, the base a1111ual wage includes a (3.5%) rate increase. 
SERVICE Part Time Up to one (1) year Up to two (2) years Up to three (3) years Over three (3) years (Senior Police Officer) Detective Function OIC 1 Function Function OIC 2 Functions Sergeant Captain HOURLY RATE 
$30. I 7 $34.41 $39.06 $43.72 $46.50 
$48.37 $48.83 $51.15 $52.07 $57.28 
Effective Ja11uary 1, 2019, tl,e a1111ual wage i11cludes a (3.5%) rate i11crease. 
SERVICE  HOURLY RATE  
Part Time  $31.23  
Up to one (1) year  $35.61  
Up to two (2) years  $40.43  
Up to three (3) years  $45.25  
Over three (3) years  $48.13  
(Senior Police Officer)  
Detective  $50.06  
Function OIC 1 Function  $50.54  
Function OIC 2 Functions  $52.94  
Sergeant  $53.89  
Captain  $59.28  

Re-opener in 2019 for increments concerning years 2020 and 2021. 
. The above figures do not include any longevity pay. Any person hired as a Police Officer after January I, 1997 will have a basic salary rate as follows: 
Up to one (1) year -74% ofSenior Police Officer base salary Up to two (2) years -84% ofSenior Police Officer base salary Up to three (3) years -94% ofSenior Police Officer base salary 
(Note: Senior Police Officer is defined as being a Police Officer with over three (3) full time years ofservice with this department and no rank.) A Canine Handler shall be provided compensation at a rate of$8.00 per hour to care for the animal. Up to ½ hour per work day while on duty may be allotted for the handler to provide the necessary basic care such as feeding and exercising the canine. While offduty on pass days or vacation it is agreed that ½ hour per day would be needed to care for the animal at the compensation rate of$8.00 per hour or $4.00 per day. This "Canine Handler" compensation rate would include all care and maintenance issues such as feeding, grooming, veterinary appointments and non-duty related events. When the canine team is required to respond for police related business such as emergency callouts or unscheduled events, the handler would receive his/her normal rate ofovertime pay. A Detective shall earn (4%) above the Senior Police Officer rate. A Function OIC shall earn five percent (5%) above the Senior Police Officer rate for each function assigned up to the maximum ofa ten percent (10%) total increase. Ranking officers who are in charge ofa function or functions are not entitled to additional Function OIC pay. A Sergeant shall earn twelve percent (12%) above the Senior Police Officer rate. A Captain shall earn ten percent ( 10%) above the Sergeant's rate. 
Any Police Officer promoted to a higher rank shall receive one-half (1/2) the percentage(%) 
commensurate with the percentage(%) allotted that rank during the probationary period ofthat 
rank. (Example: Ifa Sergeam earns ten percent (10%) ahol'e a Senior Police Officer's rate, 
thatprobationa,y Sergeant shall earn five percent (5%) above the Senior Police Officer's rate for the duration oftheprobationa,yperiod.) 
Anytime the Police Captain and/or Sergeants assume or is appointed to the position ofActing Chiefor OIC ofthe department in the absence ofthe ChiefofPolice, forecasted or not, for forty 
(40) or more consecutive working hours (defined as (5) consecutive days), the OIC ofthe department shall receive the salary ofthe ChiefofPolice for the entire time ofabsence. The Acting Chiefor OIC must not be on scheduled vacation, personal, compensatory or sick time to receive such pay. 
ARTICLE V -HOURS OF WORK 
A. Either eight (8), or ten ( 10) hours depending on the officers assigned schedule shall constitute the normal day's work and forty (40) hours a normal week's work. Overtime work consists ofany hours ofwork, rounded offto the next highest quarter hour, in excess ofeight (8) or ten (10) hours on any regularly scheduled work day, or forty (40) hours in any regularly scheduled work week. There shall be no pyramiding ofovertime. The overtime pay rate shall be one and one-half (1 1/2) times the basic hourly salary rate for each hour ofovertime work performed by an employee divided by two thousand eighty (2,080 hours.) A day is a continuous twenty-four (24) hour period beginning at the regular starting ofthe Police Officer's shift. A workweek is a seven (7) consecutive day period beginning at 12:01 a.m. Sunday. Note: See section VII -Holidays for overtime hours worked on a holiday. 
B. Compensatory Time -Any Police Officer may accumulate compensatory time in lieu of overtime. Compensatory time shall be accumulated at the rate oftime and one half,just as overtime is accumulated. Compensatory time may be accumulated in lieu ofovertime in any situation in which overtime is involved, i.e. continuation ofshift, mandatory training, court time, etc. subject to the approval ofthe Chief ofPolice or his designee. (Example: A Police Officer attends magistrate court in which a minimum oftwo (2) hours court time is accumulated. That officer may accumulate three (3) hours compensatory time in lieu ofthe two (2) hours court time at the rate oftime and one half.) 
Compensatory time may be scheduled as a day offby the officer with the approval ofthe 
ChiefofPolice or his designee, depending on scheduling needs. The request for 
compensatory time will be made with as much notice as possible prior to the requested day 
off. Compensatory time may also be utilized by a Police Officer either at the beginning (to 
begin a shift late) or at the end (to leave early) ofa shift as long as the compensatory time is 
approved by the ChiefofPolice or his designee. The amount will be at the discretion ofthe 
ChiefofPolice or his designee and will remain a management right as is the schedule. 
1. Additional stipulations on the use ofcompensatory time are as follows: 
a. No limit on compensatory time . .Af ~b. In the last 36 months ofemployment, only 80 hours per year or 240 hours i -ce---, maximum compensatory time will be used for pension calculations. 
:::fr1H c. The remaining compensatory time will be paid at rate when the compensatory time was earned. 
/2/.r~v 
ARTICLE VI -USE OF PRIVATE AUTOMOBILES 
All Police Officers and Part-Time Police Officers shall be reimbursed at the current IRS rate when scheduled to use their privately owned automobile while on departmental business, provided, however, that no employee shall be entitled to any reimbursement when said employee files for and receives a mileage fee from any third party or court ofcompetent jurisdiction. The employees shall also be reimbursed for any parking fee while on departmental business. 
ARTICLE VII -HOLIDAYS 
A. Police Officers shall be granted paid holidays as follow: New Year's Day General Election Day Good Friday Veterans Day 
Primary Election Day Thanksgiving Day Memorial Day Christmas Day Independence Day Four (4) Personal Days Labor Day 
B. Police Officers not scheduled to work on any ofthe above days shall be paid eight (8) hours pay at his basic hourly salary rate for such holidays. 
C. Police Officers who work on any ofthe above days shall be paid sixteen (16) hours holiday pay at his/her regular rate ofpay, in addition to the eight (8) hours calculated in his/her base pay. In lieu ofreceiving holiday pay, the employee may work at his/her basic salary rate and be allowed to acquire sixteen (16) hours compensatory time (eight (8) holiday and eight (8) compensatory.) 
D. If any holiday named above shall fall within a Police Officer's vacation period, such holiday shall not be considered a part ofsuch vacation period and the Police Officer shall be given an additional day offor holiday pay. 
E. In order to be eligible for holiday pay, the Police Officer must have worked on his last scheduled shift before the holiday and his first scheduled shift after the holiday, unless he is unable to do so for good cause. 
F. Overtime hours worked on a holiday shall be paid at the holiday rate pay scale as long as the overtime is first approved by a supervisor. 
ARTICLE VIII -VACATIONS 
Eligibility 
A Police Officers will be provided vacation time off from work, without loss ofpay, under this agreement. To be eligible for a full vacation in any calendar year hereof, however, a Police Officer must: 
I) Have an annual employment anniversary day in the calendar year in which the vacation is to be taken. 
2) Vacation Upon Resignation -A Police Officer's vacation shall be pro-rated on an annual basis dependent upon that officer's resignation. (i.e. a Police Officer who is entitled to 4 weeks' vacation and resigns after 6 months ofthe new year would be entitled to 2 weeks' vacation. Ifthe officer would have already taken 4 weeks' vacation and resigns after 6 months into the year, the officer would be required to reimburse the township for 2 weeks, etc.) An officer who has accumulated enough time to vest his pension ( 12 years) shall be entitled to receive his vacation pay for that year at the beginning of that calendar year. 
3) Vacation Upon Retirement -An officer who is retiring will not be able to buy back any vacation time. Ifan officer has any unused vacation time remaining upon his retirement date, the officer will be required to exhaust his remaining vacation time prior to his retirement date. Ifan officer decides to retire before using all ofhis vacation time he will not be compensated for it. 
Length ofService 
A. An eligible Police Officer, who, in any calendar year ofthis agreement, has attained years of continuous service indicated on the following table, shall be granted time off, commensurate therewith as follows: 
Years ofService  Vacation  
Up to 1 year  0 weeks  
1 to 2 years  1 week  
3 to 4 years  2 weeks  
5 to 8 years  3 weeks  
9 to 15 years  4 weeks  
16 to 20 years  5 weeks  
21 years and over  6 weeks  
Vacation Scheduling  

A. The scheduling ofvacation shall be in accordance with seniority. The most senior Police Officer shall have the first choice and so on, until all vacations are scheduled. The vacation book shall be distributed in the fall of the year proceeding the year in which the vacations are to be taken. In the event two members schedule vacation during the same time period, the officer scheduling that vacation period first shall have the priority ofthat vacation time. The ChiefofPolice shall have discretion, during a crisis situation or in extreme times of insufficient police manpower, to cancel a vacation and to have the affected member reschedule the vacation at another time. 
ARTICLE IX -UNIFORM AND EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE 
A. Each Police Officer shall be granted a unifonn and equipment allowance each calendar year ofone thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Any officer going over his/her uniform allowance shall have the balance subtracted from the following year's unifonn allowance as long as approved by the Chief ofPolice or his designee. Any officer going over his unifonn allowance without pennission of the ChiefofPolice or his designee may be subject to disciplinary action. 
B. Each Police Officer shall receive an allowance ofTwo Hundred Dollars ($200.00) per year for the cleaning ofunifonns. 
C. The Township shall pay for repairs and/or replacement of police uniform damaged in the line ofduty. 
D. The Township shall provide new body armor for each Police Officer every five (5) years, in addition to the unifonn allowance for that year. 
E. Any officer assigned primarily to an investigative (Detective) position, may utilize one-half ( 1/2) ofhis/her unifonn allowance to purchase civilian clothing. The officer must submit the appropriate receipts to be reimbursed for such purposes. 
F. Unifonn and Equipment Allowance -The Township shall provide and maintain exercise equipment for sworn and non-sworn personnel so that both may have access to necessary equipment to comply with the departmental physician's established height and weight requirements. This equipment may include, but not be limited to, free weights, aerobic exercise equipment (steppers, exercise cycles, treadmills, etc.) and nautilus equipment. 
ARTICLE X -ACCIDENT AND SICKNESS DISABILITY INCOME INSURANCE 
A. The Township shall provide insurance for short-tenn accident and sickness disability which will provide benefits ofseventy-five (75%) percent of the officer's basic weekly salary for a period ofup to twenty-six (26) weeks for officers disabled by reason ofnon-service related sickness or accident. 
B. The Township shall provide insurance for long-tenn accident and sickness disability which will provide benefits ofsixty-five (65%) percent ofthe officer's basic weekly salary who is totally disabled by reason ofnon-service related sickness or accident with benefits to commence after twenty-six (26) weeks ofdisability and continue to age sixty-five (65) or attainment ofnonnal retirement age, whichever shall come first. 
ARTICLE XI -LIABILITY 
The unit shall be covered by Law Enforcement Agency/Officers Professional Liability Insurance which is presently being written by the Imperial Casualty & Indemnity Company and which includes false arrest insurance. 
False Arrest Insurance 
A The Unit shall be covered with the following False Arrest Insurance: 
1) The insurance afforded is only with respect to personal injury arising out ofan offense included within such ofthe following groups ofoffenses as are indicated by specific premium charge or charges: 
a) 
False Arrest, Detention or Imprisonment or Malicious Prosecution ... A,B,C 

b) 
Libel, Slander, Defamation or Violation ofright ofPrivacy ... 

c) 
Wrongful Entry or Eviction or other Invasion ofRight ofPrivate Occupancy 


Minimum Premium $  Total Provisional Premium$  
Limits ofLiability:  $1,000,000.00 each person aggregate  
$1,000,000.00 general aggregate:  

Insured person's participation nil% 
Life Insurance 
A. The Township shall provide, at its expense, a $50,000 Life Insurance Policy for Police Officers. 
B. The Township shall provide for the payment ofDouble Indemnity in the event that the Police Officer dies in the line ofduty. 
ARTICLE XII -HOSPITALIZATION AND OTHER INSURANCE GROUP INSURANCE HOSPITALIZATION AND MEDICAL INSURANCE 
A. The Township shall provide for each Police Officer, their spouses and dependents a premium medical coverage under the Highmark Premium PPO Blue $10.00 plan, as provided by Highmark Health Insurance Company or a comparable equal plan. Employee contributions will be equal to 2.5% ofthe cost ofthe hospitalization plan selected, i.e. (Single, Family, etc.) The Board of Supervisors and Bargaining Unit both agree that the employee contribution to the increased cost ofthe hospitalization plan selected may increase up to 3.5% for the duration ofthis contract. This contribution will be paid through a pre-taxed payroll deduction plan. The Township can change to a carrier or plan that is equivalent to the current carrier or plan. It is understood that equivalent does not mean "exactly the same." It is the intention ofthe parties to provide Wage and Policy Unit members with a policy which, taken in its entirety, is as good as or better than the current coverage. 
B. The Township shall provide for each Police Officer, their spouses and dependents the highest benefit dental plan, covering braces and dentures. 
C. Police Officers who retire after December 31, 1978 shall be permitted to elect to remain in the Hospitalization Plan also Medical Group Insurance Plans after their retirement. 
D. Police Officers who are hired after September 1, 2016 who retire with twenty-five (25) years ofservice after 1994, shall receive a 97 .5% paid Premium Health Care Hospitalization Plan equal to the Health Care Plan that was in effect at the time the officer retired until the Police Officer and/or Spouse attain Medicare eligible age. This benefit is only entitled to the officer's spouse as long as the retired officer and spouse remain married. In the event ofdivorce the retired officer's spouse is no longer eligible to receive this benefit. In the event the officer or retired officer dies prior to his or her spouse, the spouse shall continue to receive the benefit until the spouse attains Medicare eligible age. 
ARTICLE XIII -VISION PLAN 
The township shall provide, by self-insuring, a vision care plan which will cover vision examinations, lenses and frames. The plan shall cover five-hundred dollars ($500.00) worth of vision expenses per family member per year. The following option now exists for Police Officer's only (family members not included.) The officer may elect refractive eye surgery/laser surgery, which will now be covered under our current vision care plan. The Township will appropriate the initial cost for such surgery, and in return, the individual officer would give up their vision benefit until the bill for the said surgery has been satisfied. (Example: An itemized bill of$2,000.00 would require a five (5) year period, for the Township to satisfy their initial expense. Any additional eye treatment i.e., exams, lenses, frames, etc., during the surgery reimbursement period will be the responsibility of the individual officer. Family members will still maintain original vision care coverage. 
ARTICLE XIV -SICK LEAVE 
A. Sick leave shall not be considered as a privilege that a Police Officer may use at his discretion, but shall only be allowed in case ofactual sickness or disability ofthe Police Officer. To receive compensation for sick leave while absent, the Police Officer must notify the Chiefof Police or the officer in charge ofhis shift at least one (1} hour prior to the scheduled starting time ofhis tour ofduty. The one hour shift notice shall be waived in case ofsudden incapacitation. 
B. When the absence is for more than five (5) days, the Police Officer shall be required to file a physician's certificate, unless the Chiefhas knowledge ofthe Police Officer's sickness or disability. A request form for sick leave, furnished by the Township, must be filled out immediately upon the Police Officer's return to work. 
C. A Police Officer earns sick leave at the rate ofone and one quarter (1-1/4) workday per month or fifteen ( 15} workdays per year. 
D. A Police Officer, who returns to work after an absence of thirty (30) work days or more, shall be required to pass a physical examination or obtain a release from a doctor stating that he is sufficiently recovered from the injury or illness which caused the aforesaid absence so that he is able to perform his duties. 
E. A police officer who is absent due to an injury or illness which may be compensated for under workmen's compensation shall not use sick leave but shall use workmen's compensation during the time ofsuch injury or illness. 
F. In case offailure ofa Police Officer to report any injury sustained by him within twenty-four 
(24) hours of its occurrence to the ChiefofPolice, it shall be presumed that such injury resulted from his own negligence unless proofto the contrary is introduced by said Police Officer. 
G. A Police Officer injured on any unapproved gainful employment other than the Township employment shall not be eligible for sick leave. 
H. Any Police Officer found to be abusing the sick leave privilege in any manner shall be subject to severe discipline, to include discharge. 
I. A Police Officer may accumulate two hundred (200) sick days. 
J. Upon accumulation ofone hundred twenty ( 120) sick days, an officer may choose to sell back at 25% ofthe current hourly wage, any number ofsick days in the excess ofthe one hundred twenty ( 120) at any time. Any accumulation ofsick days over two hundred (200) will automatically be bought back at the end ofthe year by the township, at the rate of25% ofthe officer's current hourly rate. (Example -An officer has 150 sick days accumulated. He sells back 30 days at 25% ofthe current wages for that contract year and still has 120 days sick leave accrued. Example -An officer has 195 sick days accrued going into next year. During that year, he accrues 15 additional sick days, which gives the officer 210 accrued sick days. The Township automatically buys back 10 sick days at 25% ofthe base rate for the calendar year and the officer still has 200 sick days accrued.) 
K. Upon retirement (twenty -five (25) years ofservice, fifty (50) years ofage) ofthe Police Officer the Township will buy back up to one hundred twenty (120) sick days at the rate of fifty percent (50%) ofthe officer's basic daily wage at the time ofhis retirement. 
L. During any calendar year, a Police Officer may use three (3) earned sick days as Family Medical Leave Days. Family Medical Leave Days are to be used in the event an immediate family member, who is ill, or is in need ofa pre-planned medical appointment with notice given as soon as possible upon learning ofthe medical appointment and requires the Police Officer's assistance. The "family member" shall be defined and limited to spouse, children, parents and siblings who reside with the officer. The Family Medical Leave Days are not to be used in association with Bereavement Leave as defined in Article XXIII ofthis contract. 
ARTICLE XV -TIME SPENT IN COURT 
A. Any Police Officer who shall be required to appear in Criminal or Juvenile Court ("Court time") during off-duty hours, shall be paid a minimum offour ( 4) hours at time and one half (1-1/2) and for actual time spent for any hours over four (4) at the rate oftime and one half (1-1/2). The Police Officer shall also be entitled to receive whatever witness fee may be paid. 
B. Any Police Officer who shall be required to appear before a member ofthe minor judiciary during off-duty hours ("Magisterial Court Time"), shall be paid a minimum oftwo (2) hours pay at time and one-half(l-1/2) and for actual time spent for any hours over two (2) at the rate oftime and one-half (1-1/2). 
C. Any Police Officer who is scheduled for duty while in court shall only receive the time and one-half (1-1/2) rate while on off-duty-time. (Example: Ifan officeris scheduled for criminal court at 9 A.M. and is scheduled for duty at 11 A.M., the officer is only eligible to receive time and one-half (1-1/2) rate from 9 A.M. to 11 A.M.). 
ARTICLE XVI -LEGAL EXPENSES 
A. Ifany criminal or civil action is brought against any Police Officer as a result ofacts performed in the course ofhis/her employment as a Police Officer, the Township shall pay the said Police Officer's legal expenses, including without limitations attorney fees. 
B. Findlay Township agrees to fully indemnify all Police Officers for all legal expenses and fees, judgments, awards and other related expenses pertaining to all litigation, including both compensatory and punitive damages, when litigation is initiated as a result ofactions taken by an officer acting under the color ofhis/her office and the action taken is in accordance with departmental written directives or past practices. This clause is retroactive to any litigation filed prior to 1992 contract year. 
ARTICLE XVII -SCHOOLS 
Any Police Officer who attends any school or courses ofinstruction pertaining to police work with the approval ofthe Township Supervisors, will be entitled to reimbursement for any expenses incurred while attending such school or course ofinstruction. Such reimbursement to include $.22 per mile traveled for on round trip traveling to and from said school. Any school, training or related department business requiring overnight stay, the Police Officer shall receive a per diem in the amount offorty five dollars ($45) per day for meals. 
ARTICLE XVIII -LONGEVITY PAY 
All Police Officers governed by this contract shall be entitled to longevity pay in accordance with the following eligibility requirements and rates ofpay: 
• 
Minimum offive (5) years' service, -3.50% ofbase salary per year but less than ten (10) years 

• 
Minimum often (10) years' service, -4.00% ofbase salary per year but less than fifteen (15) years 

• 
Minimum offifteen (15) years' -4.50% ofbase salary per year service, but less than twenty (20) years 

• 
Minimum oftwenty (20) years of -5.00% ofbase salary per year service 


An additional seven percent (7%) will be applied to the above listed longevity pay rates, for the contract period to be reviewed annually. Upon conclusion ofthe contract year the Township in agreement with the members bound by this contract will either eliminate or adjust accordingly the seven percent (7%) rate based on the soundness ofpension actuarial studies. The adjustment would not affect the current longevity requirements and/or rates as listed above. 
Longevity pay will be accumulated and paid annually on each officer's anniversary date ofhire. 
ARTICLE XIX -OVERTIME BY SENIORITY 
General overtime shall be assigned based on a rotation ofthe officers' current roster by seniority, 
i.e. officers will be listed and offered to work overtime in order ofthe list. Ifan officer declines, the overtime conflicts with his current work schedule or the officer is unable to be contacted, it is considered a "Pass" for that specific overtime and the next officer on the list will be offered the overtime. Each time overtime is offered, the officer following the last officer assigned overtime will be offered the overtime first and the process will follow as delineated above. When additional overtime is required preceding the beginning ofa certain shift or continuing into an existing shift, that overtime shall be scheduled at the discretion of a supervisor or OIC of the shift. 
ARTICLE XX -PENSIONS 
A. All Police Officers hired prior to January 1, 2015 may retire with a pension at age fifty (50) or thereafter, provided they have completed a minimum oftwenty-five (25) years of continuous service. Per the wage re-opener of2014, all Police Officers hired on or after January 1, 2015 may retire with a pension at age fifty-five (55) or thereafter, provided they have completed a minimum oftwenty-five (25) years ofcontinuous service. 
B. The Board ofSupervisors and Bargaining Unit made and agreement on November 9, 2016 specifying the following. Subsection Bl ofthis article (XX) shall apply only to Police Officers and part time officers (ifand when they are made Police Officers) who are hired before September 1, 2016 who shall be exempt from the subsection 82 ofthis Article (XX). Subsection B2 ofthis Article (XX) shall only apply to all Police Officers hired after September 1, 2016. 
1) The amount ofthe pension benefit shall be fifty percent (50%) ofthe monthly average salary ofthe officer during the last thirty-six (36) months ofhis/her employment. Pension calculations are based on gross earnings as reported in the officer's W2 form, as outlined in 526 PA 324 A.2d 366 (1991) (Paylock Vs W. Mifflin). 
2) The amount ofthe pension benefit shall be fifty percent (50%) ofthe monthly average gross salary as reported on the officer's W-2 form plus longevity but excluding, sick time buyback, comp time buy back and personal day buy back during the last thirty -six (36) months ofhis/her employment. 
C. After Retirement Eligibility: Upon the death ofa member who is retired or eligible for retirement, the surviving spouse will receive 50 percent ofthe amount the Participant was receiving or entitled to receive payable for life. For members Killed in Service, the surviving spouse will receive a benefit equal to 100 percent ofthe participant's salary as ofthe date of death, payable for life. In the event ofthe spouse's death, the Participant's dependent children will share the benefit equally until age 18, or age 23 ifattending college. 
D. Police Officers who have completed at least twelve (12) years oftotal police service for the Township shall be entitled to vest their retirement benefits in accordance with Resolution No. 82-26, adopted December 8, 1982. 
E. The social security offset ofthe Police Officer's pension is eliminated with the 1989 contract. The Township agrees that the officer will receive his/her full amount ofpension due both prior to and after the officer becomes entitled to Social Security Benefits. All actuarial studies will be made available to the Police Wage and Policy Unit. A representative ofthe Wage and Policy Unit shall be included in any meetings related to pension fund matters. 
F. Beginning in the year 2000, each Police Officer will contribute five percent (5%) ofhis/her actual earnings to the pension fund. During the 2000 contract year, upon completion ofan actuarial study, a pension re-opener will occur to explore the feasibility ofeliminating the said five percent (5%). 
G. Service Related Disability Provisions: The Pension Plan shall include a provision for a service-related disability. Resolution 98-29 amends the Police Pension Plan Document (Resolution 92-36) which provides the necessary language to fulfill this requirement. 
H. As ofJanuary 1, 2002 the pension benefit shall include a cost ofliving adjustment (COLA) for qualified personnel in accordance with Act 600. This total benefit is not to exceed 65% ofthe average salary used to compute the retirement benefit. The plan shall provide an annual increase ofretiree benefits based on, but not to exceed the annual change in the Consumer Price Index. It is agreed upon by the members ofthe wage and policy unit that an 

additional 2.5% pension contribution may be needed to support the pension fund. ~fo•e: The •.•;age a:nEi po1ie¥ uait, as •;;ell as Hte Beafti a€ Sttf)eF¥i!ieH1, agtee to a 'f'easiett heacfih'e epe1te1Lwitfttn. tJte tem, ef tl'.lt:t eontfflet. • As a result ofthe re-opener held August 14, 2002, the Board ofSupervisors agree to an increase ofthe COLA benefit from 65% to 75% ofthe average salary used to compute the 
retirement benefit. This change shall take place following the first sound actuarial study after January I, 2004. 
ARTICLE XXI -PAST POLICIES AND PRACTICES 
Any and all benefits herein and before provided by the Township of Findlay and not specifically mentioned above shall be continued in full force and effect without abatement. 
. . . ' 
ARTICLE XXII -PAY DAYS 
Paydays shall be every other Friday. 
ARTICLE XXIII -BEREAVEMENT LEAVE 
Upon the death ofa Police Officer's spouse, child, grandchild, mother, father, sister, brother, mother-in-law, father-in-law, sister-in-law, brother-in-law, grandmother or grandfather, each bargaining unit employee shall be accorded a five (5) day leave ofabsence from work with no loss ofpay. 
The affected Police Officer shall have the sole right to determine when his leave period will commence, provided (1) that any such period consist ofno more than five (5) consecutive calendar days; and (2) that the funeral or interment ofthe deceased relative occur on the second or third day ofthat period, under these provisions. 
ARTICLE XXIV -AMMUNITION 
The Township shall provide ammunition to Police Officers for firearms training directed by the ChiefofPolice or required by law, also ammunition for duty. 
ARTICLE XXV -EDUCATION INCENTIVE 
A. Any Police Officer having a college degree in any Criminal Justice related field will be compensated on his or her full time anniversary hire date according to the following scale: Associate Degree -1.5% ofbase pay 
Bachelor's Degree -2.0% ofbase pay Master's Degree -2.5% ofbase pay 
B. Any Police Officer who has served in the United States military will be compensated on his 
or her full time anniversary hire date according to the following scale: Up to 4 years active duty 1.5% ofbase pay or 
, • I • 
6 or more years reserve 
duty 
4 or more years active 2.0% ofbase pay 
duty 
No combination ofreserve and active duty years will be considered when determining 
military incentive (Police Officer would choose either Active Duty years or Reserve 
years). Also, eligible Police Officers can only receive one incentive (Police Officer 
would choose either the Military or Education Incentive). The Police Officer's DD214 
form must show proofofan honorable discharge in order to receive this incentive. 
C. Any Police Officer continuing his education in college courses related to the Criminal Justice Field, or required by the Institution to achieve a degree in a Criminal Justice related field will be reimbursed for all class related expenses not to exceed one-thousand dollars ($1,000) per semester. In order for the reimbursement to take place, the Police Officer must maintain a two point zero (2.0) or "C" grade point average in each ofthe course/courses attended. 
D. Any Police Officer who receives funds for continuing education agrees to remain in the employment ofFindlay Township for a period offour (4) years following the most recent funding. Ifthe Police Officer terminates his employment prior to the four (4) year period, the Police Officer agrees to repay the Township for the amount offunding received or a proportional basis. (Example: An officer receiving ($850) in Janua,y of1999 who resigned in January of2001 would be required to repay ($425), or 50%, ofthefunding received due to the fact the officer remained for two years ofthefour required years. The Police Officer will only be responsible to repay anyfunding thatfalls within the four (4) year agreemel1f.) 
E. The Chiefofpolice will have the discretion to determine ifthe degree or course meets the requirements of a Criminal Justice Related field. 
ARTICLE XXVI-PROBATIONARY PATROL OFFICERS 
A. Any Probationary Patrol Officer (as defined in Article 17 ofthe Findlay Township Police Department Rules and Regulations) resigning his position within one (1) year ofemployment without the recommendation ofthe ChiefofPolice shall be responsible to reimburse the township for the entire cost ofhis/her training. This shall include but not be limited to all salaries associated with both the probationary officer and the training officer on the training period; any associated expenses incurred by the township while the probationary officer is enrolled in a training academy; and any equipment or uniforms issued to the Probationary Patrol Officer. 
ARTICLE XVII -CALEA CLAUSE 
The Township must provide all necessary requirements and essential funds, manpower, equipment, and supplies to maintain compliance with the standards promulgated by the Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement Agencies (CALEA) that are applicable to 
• • -I 
provided they adhere to policy, and provides for proper training and equipment that may save the life of a citizen and/or a Police Officer. 
ARTICLE XXVIII -INVALIDATION CLAUSE 
Any invalidation ofany single clause contained in this contract does not invalidate the entire contract, only the clause or clauses affected. 
.. ,, . , 
In WITNESS WHEREOF and intending to be legally bound hereby, the parties have set their hands and seals this Qtn.. day of {)~ , 20 l 0 . 
ATTEST: TOWNSHIP OF FINDLAY 

WITNESS: 



Sergeant Thomas Downing, Chaiirnan 

.... 
AGREEMENT 
The Township ofFindlay and the Findlay Township Police Department Wage and Policy Unit agree that Police Officers and part-time officers (ifand when they are made Police Officers) who are hired before September I, 2016 are eligible for retiree medical benefits under these conditions: 
Police Officers, who retire with twenty-five (25) years ofservice after 1994, shall receive a paid Premium Health Care Hospitalization Plan equal to the Health Care Plan that was in effect at the time the officer retired. The municipality shall pay the percentage ofthe cost ofthe plan that was in effect at the time the officer retired, for both the retiring officer and spouse. The benefit shall be provided until the death ofeach benefactor. This benefit is only granted to the officer's spouse as long as the retired officer and spouse remain married. In the event ofdivorce the retired officer's spouse is no longer eligible to receive this benefit. In the event the retired officer dies prior to his or her spouse, the spouse shall continue to receive the benefit. 
In WITNESS WHEREOF and intending to be legally bound hereby, the parties have set 
their hands and seals this qtt\. day of fuov uY\ClU-_ , 20 Jk.._. 
ATTEST: TOWNSHIP OF FINDLAY 

WITNESS: 
~cX~ 





