 

g,
ee

i
&

 

RIGHT-TO-KNOW RESPONSE

DATE OF RESPONSE: March 17, 2021
RIGHT-TO-KNOW OFFICER: Betsy Rengers, Manager

RESPONSE SUBMITTED BY: E-MAIL (©U.S.MAIL- UU FAX CL] IN-PERSON

RESPONSE SUBMITTED TO: Thomas Vielott
117 W. 8 Street

Aspinwall, PA 15125

Thomas Vielott,

Pursuant to your right-to-know request dated 3/13/2021 and received by Leet Township on
3/15/2021:

1. GRANTED: Enclosed please find the current Collective Bargaining Agreement for the Leet
Township Police Department.

Signature of Right-To-Know Officer: fe bot

194 Ambridge Avenue, Fair Oaks, PA 15003
Phone: 724-266-2280 Fax: 724-266-6149
www.leettownship.org
AGREEMENT

THIS Agreement, made and entered into this 1** day of January, 2017, by and between

THE TOWNSHIP OF LEET, a municipal corporation organized and existing under the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and located in the County of Allegheny and Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania aforesaid (hereinafter referred to as "Township"),

AND
The full time Police Officers of the Police Department of the Township of Leet

(hereinafter referred to as "Police"),

WITNESSETH

WHEREAS, the Township and the Police have settled their differences through a
collective bargaining process; and

WHEREAS, the Township and Police agree that they are bound by the terms of the Act
of June 24, 1968, P.L. 237, No. 111 43 P.S. Section 217, et. Seq., (Act 111" hereinafter).

ARTICLE 1
EFFECTIVE DATE

This Agreement shall become effective as of January 1, 2017 and shall continue in full
force and effect through December 31, 2021.

ARTICLE I
WORKDAY, WEEK AND SCHEDULE

A. A "workday" shall consist of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours beginning with the
scheduled starting time of the first shift of 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m., then the second shift
of 2:00 p.m, to 10:00 p.m., and then the third shift of 10:00 p.m. to 6 a.m.

B. A "scheduled workday" shall consist of eight (8) consecutive hours of work per shift.
Each member of the Police force shall work the shifts and workdays assigned to him by
the Chief of Police, unless either of the following two conditions applies:

1. The Chief is entitled to change and adjust the shift starting times in the
event of emergency or in the event that he deems it necessary.

2: The Township reserves the right to cut back on man-hours if it deems
necessary due to insufficient funds. Furthermore, the Township
reserves the right to reduce the number of officers in its employment if
it deems necessary due to insufficient funds.
A "Work Week" shall consist of Sunday through Saturday consecutively. Each Officer
covered hereunder shall be guaranteed a minimum of forty (40) hours per week with
exception for that situation provided for in Subsection B, (2) set forth above.

A "Pay Period" shall consist of two work weeks. Each Officer shall be guaranteed a
minimum of eighty (80) hours per pay period with the exception for that situation
provided for in Subsection B (2) set forth above.

There shall be a minimum of eight (8) hours off between shifts worked.
ARTICLE II]

BASE PAY SCALE 2017 - 2021

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

RANK 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021
Lieutenant $31.25 $32.03 $32.83 $33.65 $34.49
5" Yr. Patrolman $28.09 $28.79 $29.51 $30.25 $31.01
4th Yr. Patrolman $25.28 $25.91 $26.56 $27.23 $27.91
3rd Yr. Patrolman $23.88 $24.47 $25.08 $25.71 $26.36
2nd Yr. Patrolman $22.47 $23.03 $23.60 $24.20 $24.81
1st Yr. Patrolman $21.07 $21.59 $22.13 $22.69 $23.26

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The above captioned Pay Scales shall apply to Full Time Police Officers. Pay Rates are calculated at a
2.5% increase per year over the Five Year Period.

New Hires shall be paid at the rate of ten dollars ($10.00) per hour while they are in training.

Part-time Police Officers pay scales shall be calculated at eighty percent (80%) of the Base Pay Scale
as that of a corresponding Full time Patrolman as pertains to their years of service.

Examples: A first year Part- time Police Officer hired in 2019 shall, at the completion of his/her
training, be paid at the rate of $17.70 per hour.

The rate of pay for a third year Part-time Officer in 2018 shall be $19.58.
ARTICLE IV
OVERTIME/COMP TIME

All hours worked in excess of Forty (40) hours in a work week will be considered overtime for
which member of this Police Force will be paid at an hourly rate of time and a half. Said overtime can be
taken in the form of comp time, in lieu of overtime pay, if so desired by the Officer and approved and

scheduled by the Chief of Police.

All hours worked within the prescribed eight hours of time off between shifts shall be considered
overtime hours.

Court time or other "special duty pay" as outlined in Article VII shall not be used to calculate
overtime.

Furthermore, there will be no stacking of premium pay and no stacking of overtime onto Holiday
pay.

ARTICLE V
LONGEVITY PAY

Longevity Pay shall be paid at the rate of Five Dollars ($5.00) per month for each month of service
for the length of the contract.

This is to be paid, in annual installments on December | of each year hereafter until otherwise
contractually modified.

The above stated provision for longevity pay will apply only to those currently employed on a full
time basis and eligible. No such provision will be given to those new hires taken on by the Police

Department after December 1, 2012.

ARTICLE VI

PENSION

In addition to the pension provided to each full time Police Officer, the Township shall provide each officer
the opportunity to participate in a 457 Deferred Compensation Plan Account. The maximum amount to be
contributed to the Township toward the Officer’s 457 Deferred Compensation Plan Account for each Police
Officer shall be Twenty-Five (25.00) dollars per month. However, this does not mean the Township will
make unilateral contributions per month. Said contributions will only be made in combination with each
police officers contribution. The Township shall amend the terms of the pension to include/provide the
D.R.O.P. Plan and the 20 Year and Out Plan.

ARTICLE VII
HEARING AND COURT TIME
MAGISTRATE COURT: When an officer is on duty, he or she receives no additional

compensation for attending a Magistrate's hearing. When the officer is not on duty, he or she will receive
two and one-half (2 /12) hours of straight time.
COMMON PLEAS' COURT: When an officer is on duty during the daylight shift and is
required to appear in Common Pleas Court, he shall receive no additional compensation, unless
such court time exceeds the two o'clock quitting time, in which case he shall be compensated at
time and one-half of his regular pay for any hours spent in court. Lunch and parking expenses will
be reimbursed. In the event an officer is not on duty and is required to appear in Common Pleas
Court, the officer will receive a minimum of four (4) hours at time and one-half (6 hours), longer if
required, plus reimbursement for lunch and parking expenses. Receipts must be presented to the
Township Manager in order to receive reimbursement.

Transporting a prisoner, taking evidence to the crime lab, or attending any mandated detail; an
officer shall be paid at the rate of time-and-one half, for a minimum of four (4) hours.

Any time an officer is called out during his/her normally scheduled time off for transporting a prisoner to
Allegheny County Jail or anywhere outside of our jurisdiction, with the exception of Coraopolis, two (2)
officers shall be utilized. Officers shall be paid at a minimum rate of 4 hours at time and one half, longer if
required when participating in any training/detail mandated by the Department.

ARTICLE VIII
VACATION AND VACATION PAY

The following scale of vacation time off with pay to the Lieutenant is as follows:

Over 25 years of ServiCe........ 66. cece eeenee eee eeees 25 days

Qualification for vacation time shall begin from the first day of service. Vacation time off shall be
cleared with the Lieutenant at least one week before vacation shall begin. Vacation time may not be carried
from one year to the next. An officer may not work during his vacation except in the event of an
emergency declared by the Chief of Police. At that time, the officer will earn regular hourly pay plus his
vacation hourly pay, or he may withdraw vacation and take it at a later date.

For those full time police officers hired by the Township of Leet after November 18, 2007 the
following scale of paid vacation applies:

a. Zero to One year service.... sevens days

b. One to Five years service...
c. Over Five years ServiCe...cceeceserererees

 

 
 
ARTICLE IX

HOLIDAYS AND HOLIDAY PAY

The following holidays are recognized as such by the Township and the Police.

New Year’s Eve

New Year’s Day Labor Day

Easter Thanksgiving Day
Memorial Day Christmas Eve
Independence Day Christmas Day

During the above nine (9) holidays, for each hour an officer works, he shall receive double time
and one-half. If the officer is off, he shall receive straight pay.

PERSONAL DAYS

Each officer is also entitled to five (5) days off for personal reasons per year. These days may be
taken at anytime during the year with the approval of the Chief of Police, provided that it shall not be
granted if it would require the Township to pay overtime to any person to cover the shift.

ARTICLE X
LIFE INSURANCE

The Township will provide each member of the Police Force with group term life insurance in the
amount of Fifty Thousand ($50,000) for coverage in the event of the officer's death.

ARTICLE XI
MEDICAL INSURANCE

During the term of this Agreement, the Township will provide the members of the Police Force
with twenty-four (24) hour group hospitalization and medical insurance coverage.

Through the term of this agreement, officers will be responsible for paying 5% of the monthly
premium associated with their individual coverage option, which will be paid via payroll deduction. This
coverage shall be for the same number of individuals and dependents that are presently covered at the
execution of this agreement. In the event that additional officers are hired or if present officers wish to
increase their coverage to include additional members of their families, that increased cost over the
original premium less the 5% officer contribution, will be the financial responsibility of the officer.

Furthermore, if the Township is able to secure a comparable insurance package from another
provider, then the Township shall be authorized to do so without an amendment to this contract or a
memorandum of understanding. In the event that the cost of the new coverage is lower, the Township's
contribution to annual health care coverage premiums will be reduced to the new lower rate with each
member of the police force paying 5% of the new amount.
ARTICLE XII
A. SHORT TERM DISABILITY

During the term of this Agreement, the Township will provide the Police with weekly disability income
coverage beginning with the first day of accident and the eighth day of sickness in an amount equal to Sixty
Percent (60%) of that Officer's pay at that time for Twenty-Six (26) weeks.

B. LONG TERM DISABILITY

During the term of this Agreement, the Township will provide the Police with monthly long term
disability coverage in the amount equal to Fifty Percent (50%) of that Officer's pay at that time for the
maximum benefit period stipulated by the applicable policy retained by the Township.

ARTICLE XII
SICK LEAVE

An officer who misses work due to sickness or injury shall call the Lieutenant at least four hours prior
to his shift he is scheduled to work. The Chief of Police shall notify another officer in the event of a call off
due to sickness or injury. An officer shall work no double shift unless it is an emergency and they are notified

or called by the Chief of Police.

The Township shall provide full pay to a sick or injured officer for thirty (30) days in every calendar
year. The Township shall be excused from payment if the officer is being paid by Workmen's Compensation,
or any other type of insurance or compensation, as per 53 P.S., Section 637. A written doctor's excuse must be
submitted to the Chief of Police and Public Safety Chairman in the event that the sick leave will extend over
five (5) days. If an excuse is not presented, all pay benefits will stop. Periodic written medical reports, if
necessary, must be submitted every six (6) months, upon request of the Board of Township Commissioners.

ARTICLE XIV
BEREAVEMENT OR EMERGENCY LEAVE
Three (3) days leave will be granted to a member of the Police Force in the event of a death in the
immediate family or any other emergency beyond the officer's control. All benefits will be expended for a
length of three (3) days. After three (3) days, pay will discontinue, but benefits will continue for a length of

one (1) month. "Immediate Family" shall be defined as: spouse, children, parent, grandparent, grandchildren,
brother, sister, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law and sister-in-law.

ARTICLE XV

EQUIPMENT

Every officer at the time of employment shall be furnished with equipment issued by the Township as
prescribed by the Chief of Police to cover a uniform dress code.
ARTICLE XVI

CLOTHING ALLOWANCE

Every new officer shall receive three (3) complete uniforms to be used in the
performance of his duties. The type (winter or summer) shall be determined by the season that
the officer is hired.

For the entire Contract period, each full time officer will be entitled to annual
clothing allowance in the amount of Seven Hundred Fifty ($750.00) Dollars. Bills must be
submitted to the Township to be paid. One Hundred Fifty ($150.00) Dollars of this amount can
be carried over for one year if not used by an officer. Clothing damage in the line of duty will
be replaced at the expense of Leet Township.

ARTICLE XVII
COMP TIME

Each Officer shall have the option of deferring his overtime, court-time, and holiday time pay to comp-time off.
Comp Time off shall be approved by either the Chief of Police or his designee and shall not be permitted
if overtime is necessary to accommodate comp-time off.

PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION

All officers will be required to attend and successfully complete a course each year in
the use and qualifications of the service weapon. The Township shall cover all costs of
ammunition and hours of pay as attended by the officer to qualify with his service weapon.

In the event of a required course that an officer must attend, the Township shall
provide him with full pay during the time of instruction, paid lunch and all necessary supplies
needed for that school. He shall also be excused from his regular work day.

Qualifying schools are limited to those that an officer can drive less than 100 miles
from the Township boundary lines. The officer shall receive prior approval from the Chief of
Police for any other schools outside of that area.

ARTICLE XIII
GENERAL PROCEDURES

Grievances are limited to matters involving interpretation of this agreement, and also
to include all matters of discipline.

Step 1. The member, either alone or accompanied by a representative of the
bargaining unit, or the bargaining unit itself, shall present the grievance in writing to the Chief
of Police within thirty (30) days of its occurrence or knowledge of its occurrence. The Chief
shall report his decision in writing to the member and the bargaining unit representative within
seven (7) days of its presentation.

Step 2. In the event that the grievance is not settled at Step 1, an appeal must be
presented in writing by the member or the bargaining unit representative to the head of the
political subdivision within seven (7) days after the response at Step 1 is due. The head of the
political subdivision or his designated representative shall respond in writing to the member
and the bargaining unit representative within seven (7) days after the receipt of the appeal.

Step 3. In the event that the grievance has not been satisfactorily resolved in Step 2, the
bargaining unit representative may initiate an appeal by servicing upon the head of the political
subdivision
a notice in writing of his intent to proceed to arbitration within seven (7) days after the receipt of the Step 2
decision.

The Arbitrator is to be selected by the parties jointly within seven (7) days after the notice has
been given. If the parties fail to agree upon an arbitrator, either party may request the American Arbitration
Association to submit a list of three (3) possible arbitrators. The parties shall meet within seven (7) days of
the receipt of the said list for the purpose of selecting the Arbitrator by alternately striking one name from
the list until only one name remains. The Township strikes the first name. The Arbitrator shall neither add
to, subtract from, nor modify the provisions of this agreement, or of any other submitted for arbitration. He
has no authority to determine any other issues not submitted to him. His decision shall be final and binding
on both parties, and he shall be required to submit his decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing. All
of the time limits contained in this article may be extended by mutual agreement. All fees and expenses of
the Arbitrator shall be divided equally between the parties. Each party shall bear the cost of preparing and
presenting its own case.

An aggrieved member and bargaining unit representative and a reasonable number of witnesses
shall be granted reasonable time during working hours to process grievances in accordance with this
decision without loss of pay.

ARTICLE XIX
ADOPTION OF POLICE CONTRACT
All previous guaranteed items between the Township and Police shall also carry over to this
agreement if they are not listed in the Agreement as a change.
ARTICLE XX

MERGER, CONSOLIDATION OR DISSOLUTION OF
POLICE SERVICES

That nothing in the within Agreement shall be interpreted or construed to prevent or limit the
Township in merging, consolidation or dissolving the Leet Township Police Department during the term of

this Agreement.
ARTICLE XXI
EFFECTIVE DATE

This Agreement shall become effective as of January 1, 2017 and shall continue in full force and
effect through December 31, 2021.

THIS AGREEMENT IS THE ENTIRE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE PARTIES AGREED
TO ON THIS IST DAY OF JANUARY, 2017.

LEET TOWNSHIP POLICE TOWNSHIP OF LEET
/s/Robert Simmons /s/Gary L. Bradel

Gary L. Bradel, President
/s/Michael Molinaro

/s/Ronald Wilson
/s/Angel Moore ATTEST:

/s/Betsy Rengers
