PROVISIONS FROM BOARDS
OF ARBITRATION AWARDS
AND
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS

BETWEEN
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
AND
THE PENNSYLVANIA STATE TROOPERS ASSOCIATION

EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2012 TO JUNE 30, 2017

Distributed by:
Pennsylvania State Police
Labor Relations Office
Harrisburg, PA 17110
Phone (717) 787-8100

INDEX
Page

Article 1, Recognition
Article 2, Prior ArbitrationAwards & Al!feements
Article 3, Distributionof Booklet
Article 4, Salaries
Article 5, Union Security& Assessments
Article 6, Schedulimt
Article 7, Overtime
Article 8, Shift Differential
Article 9, Call Time
Article 10,Alert Time
Article 11, Holidays
Article 12, PersonalDays
Article 13, Vacations
Article 14, Sick Leave
Article 15, Medical Leave Extension
Article 16, Life Insurance
Article 17, SurvivorBenefits- PSTA ScholarshipFund
Article 18, DisabilityBenefits
Article 19, Hosoitaland MedicalInsurance
Article20, PrescriptionDrug Proirram
Article 21, Vision Care Plan
Article 22, Dental Care Prol!l'am
Article 23, Health ReimbursementArran,zement
Article 24, EmergencyCounselingPro2TI1I11
Article 25, Retirement
Article 26, Discipline
Article 27, Legal Counsel
Article 28, GrievanceProcedure
Article 29, AdministrativeLeave
Article 30, Union Business
Article 31, PersonnelFiles
Article 32, ClothingMaintenance
Article 33, OutsideEmployment
Article 34, Reductionin Force
Article 35, Member Treatment
Article 36, TemporaryAssi2I1J11ent
Article 37, SpecializedPositionsand Training
Article 38, Transfers
Article 39, Badge, Retirement ID, Honorable Discharge Upon Retirement
1

3
3
3
3
6
7
8
8
9
9

9
10
11
13
15
15
16
18
18

21
22
22
23
23
24
25
30
30
37
38
38
39
39
39
40
40
41
48
49

Article 40, Car UtilizationStudy
Article41, Health Care Cost ContainmentCommittee
Article 42, SpecialCommittee-PromotionSystem
Article43, Side Letters
Article 44, Physical FitnessCommittee
Article 45, FamilyCare Leave
Article 46, LimitedDuty
Article 47, EmployeeAuthorizedPayroll Deductions
Article48, Leave DonationProl!fam
Article 49, Civilianization
Article 50, TobaccoUse
Article 51, Health Care Shop Around
Article 52, Term of Afil'eement
AooendixA, State Police Pay Schedule,July 1, 2012
AppendixB, State Police Pay Schedule,July 1, 2013
• Table I-Membershired prior to 7/1/2013
• Table 2-Membershired on or after 7/1/2013
AppendixC, State Police Pay Schedule,July l, 2014
• Table I-Members hired prior to 7/1/2014
• Table 2-Membershired on or after 7/1/2014
AppendixD, State Police Pay Schedule,July 1, 2015
• Table I-Members hired prior to 7/1/2015
• Table 2-Membershired on or after 7/1/2015
AppendixE, State Police Pay Schedule,July 1, 2016
• Table I-Membershired prior to 7/1/2016
• Table 2-Membershired on or after 7/1/2016
AppendixF, DisciplineStandards
AooendixG, Index of Referencesto ArbitrationAwards & Al!feements

2

49
49
50
50
50
51
52
53
54
56
57
57
58
59
61

65

69

73

77
80

ARTICLE 1
RECOGNITION
Pursuant to Act 111 of 1968, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania recognizes the
Pennsylvania State Troopers Association (PST A) as the exclusive representative for collective
bargaining purposes for all State Police members excluding the Commissioner, Deputy
Commissioners and cadets.

ARTICLE2
PRIOR ARBITRATION AWARDS AND AGREEMENTS
Section 1.
All prior arbitration awards and agreements are hereinafter incorporated by
reference and the provisions of the awards and agreements shall be applicable except as modified
herein or by mutual agreement between the parties.
Section 2.
If any of the awards by an arbitration panel are not implemented either as a result of
legal impediment or failure to obtain legislation, then the Arbitration Panel shall be reconvened so
that an equivalent benefit can be given in place of the benefit not granted. If the neutral chairman
is not available then the parties shall select another neutral chairman by the method provided in Act
111 of the Commonwealth.

ARTICLE3
DISTRIBUTION OF BOOKLET
The Commonwealth shall print and distribute to each member as quickly as possible the
terms of this Agreement and other relevant provisions of previous awards and agreements.

ARTICLE4
SALARIES
Section I.
Effective July 1, 2012, the base pay rates of Troopers in the State Police Pay
Schedule shall be increased by 1.0%.
Section 2.
Effective July 1, 2013, the base pay rates of Troopers in the State Police Pay
Schedule shall be increased by 2.0%.
Section 3.
Effective July I, 2014, the base pay rates of Troopers in the State Police Pay
Schedule shall be increased by 2.5%.

3

Section 4.
a.
Effective July I, 2015, the base pay rates of Troopers in the State Police Pay
Schedule shall be increasedby 2.5%.
b.
Effective July I, 2016, the base pay rates of Troopers in the State Police Pay
Schedule shall be increasedby 3.0%.
Section 5.
follows:

There shall be maintained a rank differential between base rates within the ranks as

a.

The rate for the rank of Corporal shall be 8.0% above the highest base (Step E)
without longevity of a Trooper.

b.

The rate for the rank of Sergeant shall be 8.5% above the rate (Step E) without
longevity of a Corporal;

C.

The rate for the rank of Lieutenant shall be 9.0% above the rate (Step E) without
longevityof a Sergeant;

d.

The rate for the rank of Captain shall be 9.0% above the rate (Step E) without
longevity of a Lieutenant;

e.

The rate for the rank of Major shall be 9.5% above the rate (Step E) without
longevityof a Captain;

The existing step "E" for the rank of Corporal and above shall be the rate upon which the base
differential shall be calculated.
Section 6.
In addition to base salary, members shall be entitled to the longevity rate indicated
for their years of service in the followingtable:
6.0% of base pay at the commencementof a member's sixth (61h) year of service
7.0% of base pay at the commencementof a member's seventh (7th) year of service
8.0% of base pay at the commencementof a member's eighth (8th) year of service
9.0% of base pay at the commencementof a member's ninth (9th) lear of service
10.0%of base pay at the commencementof a member's tenth (10 ) year of service
11.0%of base pay at the commencementof a member's eleventh (11th) year of service
12.0%of base pay at the commencementof a member's twelfth (12th) rear of service
13.0%of base pay at the commencementof a member's thirteenth (131 ~ year of service
14.0%of base pay at the commencementof a member's fourteenth(141 ) year of service
15.0%of base pay at the commencementof a member's fifteenth (15th) year of service
16.0%of base pay at the commencementof a member's sixteenth(16th) year of service
17.0%of base pay at the commencementof a member's seventeenth(17'h) year of service
18.0%of base pay at the commencementof a member's eighteenth(18th) year of service

4

19.0% of base pay at the commencement of a member's
20.0% of base pay at the commencement of a member's
21.0% of base pay at the commencement of a member's
22.0% of base pay at the commencement of a member's
23.0% of base pay at the commencement of a member's
24.0% of base pay at the commencement of a member's
25.0% of base pay at the commencement of a member's
26.0% of base pay at the commencement of a member's
27.0% of base pay at the commencement of a member's
28.0% of base pay at the commencement of a member's

nineteenth (19th) year of service
twentieth (20th) year of service
twenty-first (2151) year of service
twenty-second (22"d) year of service
twenty-third (23n1)year of service
twenty-fourth (24th) year of service
twenty-fifth (25 th) year of service
twenty-sixth (26th) year of service
twenty-seventh (271h) year of service
twenty-eighth (28 th) year of service

Section 7.
a.
Members who graduate from the State Police Academy shall start at Step S
of the Trooper pay range and shall have an anniversary date one year from the date of graduation.
All members shall receive one increment each year on their anniversary date until they reach the
maximum of their pay range.
b.
Members who are hired after July 1, 2013, the wage progression from Step S to
Step E shall be as follows:
Step S
Step A
StepB
StepC
StepD
StepE

75% of the Step E Rate
80% of the Step E Rate
85% of the Step E Rate
90% of the Step E Rate
95% of the Step E Rate
100% (Base Salary)

Section 8.
Members who are promoted shall be placed in the new pay range at the same step
and longevity range as that held prior to the promotion with no change in the member's anniversary
date or longevity date.
Section 9.
In calculating length of service for longevity purposes, the date of a member's
service shall be counted from the date of enlistment. For the purpose of this Article, a member1s
longevity date will not be adjusted for leaves without pay granted in accordance with Article 15,
Sections 1 and 2 and Article 45, Section I.
Section 10.
There shall be a Step denoted as Trooper 1st Class. Troopers shall advance to
st
Trooper 1 Class after 12 years of service, and shall be furnished with a clearly noticeable
uniform insignia to denote their status. The differential rate for a Trooper 1st Class shall be 2%
above the Step E rate. The appropriate longevity increment based on total years of service shall
then be applied to that rate. Effective July 1, 2013, each Trooper 1st Class shall be paid an
annual Master Trooper differential of 3% above the Step E rate upon commencement of their
rd
23 year of credited service.

5

Section 11.
Effective January 1, 2009, all bargaining unit members shall be required to sign
up for direct deposit of paychecks and travel reimbursements.

ARTICLE5
UNION SECURITY & ASSESSMENTS
Section l.
The Commonwealth shall deduct the current PSTA arbitration assessment from
compensation received by a member. The arbitration assessment shall be deducted at the rate of
1
1/26 h of the total assessment from such member's paycheck each pay and shall be forwarded to
the PSTA by the Commonwealth. For members who have not joined the PSTA, a service charge
shall be deducted from their compensation as a contribution toward the administration of
arbitration awards and the costs of collective bargaining and representation of members in the same
manner and amount or percentage as the arbitration assessment. The biweekly amount to be
deducted shall be certified to the Commonwealth by the PSTA. Upon failure to pay the charge or
fee, the Commonwealth shall discharge the member when advised by the PSTA.
Section 2.
Where a member has been suspended, furloughed, or discharged and subsequently
returned to work, with full or partial back pay, or has been reclassified retroactively, the
Commonwealth shall deduct the assessments and charges that are due and owing for the period for
which the member receives back pay. Arbitration assessments and service charges will be resumed
for members upon their return from leave of absence without pay or recall from furlough.
Section 3.
The Commonwealth shall provide the PSTA, on a quarterly basis, a list of all State
Police members excluding the Commissioner, Deputy Commissioners and cadets. This list shall
contain the member's name, social security number, address, rank and work location.
Section 4.
The PSTA shall indemnify and hold the Commonwealth harmless against any and
all claims, suits, orders and judgments brought or issued against the Commonwealth as a result of
the action taken or not taken by the Commonwealth under the provisions of this Article.

6

ARTICLE6
SCHEDULING
Section l.
The workweek shall consist of any five workdays in the week from Saturday
through Friday.
Section 2.
The workday for all members shall be any eight consecutive hours, inclusive of the
meal period, within the period from midnight to midnight of the calendar day; up to two hours may
be in the preceding or subsequent day. Should the time overlap of two hours be exceeded by the
Commonwealth, the member so assigned shall be paid time and one-half of his/her rate of pay, for
all hours in excess of the two hour overlap period.
Section 3.
There shall be a minimum of eight hours off between shifts. When two shifts are
worked with fewer than eight hours off, hours worked in the eight hour period beginning with the
end of the first shift shall be paid at a rate of two and one-half times the hourly rate. A member
shall receive no additional compensation for work performed during this period.
This provision shall not apply where the member voluntarily changes his/her shift after the
schedule is posted and thereafter works a shift with fewer than eight (8) hours off (said eight (8)
hour period including any call time that may occur) which would not have occurred but for the
voluntary change in shift. This foregoing exception shall not prevail when a member is called in
pursuant to Article 9, Call Time.
Section 4.
A change in shift after the shift is posted may take place where 24 hours' notice is
given prior to the start of the newly-scheduled shift. Any change in schedule without such notice
shall be paid at the rate of time and one-half for all hours on that shift. This section shall not be
construed as preventing such shift changes.
Section 5.
A member shall not be required to remain within the jurisdiction of his/her station
during non-working hours. This provision shall not apply to a member who is on alert time.
Section 6.
The roster of bargaining unit members' shifts shall be posted at each work
location no later than the Tuesday two weeks preceding that described in the roster.
Section 7.

Court Time

a.
Once posted as provided in Section 6 above, the roster shall not be changed as a
result of the necessity for the member to be present at any judicial or administrative proceeding
relating to or arising from the performance of his/her duties, except with the affected member's
voluntary permission. No member shall be discriminated against for withholding such permission.

7

b.
ln the event that the member would be required to be present at any judicial or
administrative proceeding relating to or arising from the performance of his/her duties on a day or
shift for which he/she had been scheduled off in accordance with the posted roster, he/she shall be
compensated in accordance with Article 9.
Section 8.
A scheduling committee comprised of four persons to be selected by the
Department and four persons to be selected by the PSTA shall meet and discuss all issues related
to the current scheduling system. The committee shall develop a pilot program to be
implemented no later than December 22, 2005. The pilot program shall be limited to a six month
period in one Troop to be selected by the Department in its discretion. The pilot program shall
not: increase the costs of operations; entail the use of 12 hour shifts; adversely impact the
efficiency or safety of affected operations or standards of service; or contain an unreasonable
number of work schedules.

ARTICLE 7
OVERTIME
Section 1.
The Commonwealth shall pay one and one-half of the member's regular hourly rate
for all hours worked in excess of eight per day or 40 per week. The 8-hour day and the 40-hour
week shall include all lunch periods. ln calculating time worked, all time shall be included, except
alert time. Time worked shall include, but not be limited to extension of work schedule, court
time, magistrate's time, mandated school time, reserve time and stand-by time.
Section 2.
Days taken by a member as sick leave days are to be counted as work days for the
purpose of computing overtime.
Section 3.
The Commonwealth shall pay one and one-half of the member's regular hourly rate
for all consecutive hours worked in excess of eight whether they occurred in one or two calendar
days.

ARTICLES
SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL
Section 1.
A shift differential of 5% will be paid for all hours actually worked between 12:00
noon and 10:00 p.m. A shift differential of 6% will be paid for all hours actually worked
between I 0:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
Section 2.
Criminal lnvestigation personnel scheduled by the Employer to work during the
hours set forth in Section 1 above shall be paid as therein provided. Shift differential shall not be
paid to Criminal Investigation personnel when the hours worked are employee controlled or are
incidental to the cases assigned to such personnel.

8

Section 3.
Effective December 24, 2008, regardless of the above language, no shift
differential shall be paid during any regularly scheduled shift that starts at or after 6:00 a.m. and
before 12:00 noon.

ARTICLE9
CALL TIME

A member who has been called in to work outside of his/her scheduled shift shall be
guaranteed a minimwn of three hours of pay at the members regular hourly rate or shall be paid at
the appropriate rate for all hours worked, whichever is greater. A member shall be released when
the specific purpose of the call in has been satisfied. However, when the member is called into
work but the call in is cancelled before the member leaves his/her home, the member will be paid
for actual time from the original call in to the cancellation but in thirty (30) minute increments.
The compensable period shall begin when the member is notified.

ARTICLE 10
ALERT TIME
Section l.
One-quarter pay shall be paid for alert time, defined as off-duty time when a
member is restricted as to where he/she may go or what he/she may do in order that he/she may
quickly return to duty upon call. The compensation is to apply to situations when a member is
alerted in connection with special circwnstances (present or anticipated) and is not meant to cover
any regular or rotational duty which may result in being recalled to active duty status.
Section 2.
While alert time shall not be included in calculations to determine overtime pay, the
Commonwealth shall not abuse the putting of members on alert.

ARTICLE 11
HOLIDAYS
Section I.

The following days shall be considered as holidays:

New Year's Day*
Martin Luther King, Jr.
Day
Presidents' Day
Good Friday*
Primary Election Day
Memorial Day*

Independence Day*
Labor Day*
Columbus Day*
Veterans' Day*
General Election Day
Thanksgiving Day*
Christmas Day*

9

Effective July 1, 2013, Primary Election Day shall be eliminated as a holiday.
Section 2.
A member who works on any of the above holidays will be given a compensatory
day off. In addition, if the member's regular weekly days off coincide with a holiday, he/she shall
be given a compensatory day off.
Section 3.
If a holiday is observed while a member is on sick leave, annual or other paid leave
status, he/she will receive his/her holiday pay and the day will not be charged against sick, annual,
or other paid leave credits.
Section 4.
If a member is required to work on one of the holidays designated by an asterisk
above, the member shall receive double time for all work performed on such a holiday. ln
addition, the member shall receive compensatory time off for all hours worked up to eight (8.0)
hours.
When a member voluntarily works on one of these holidays for a special enforcement
program, the member will be paid at the rate of time and one-half provided the member was in
compensable status for 40 other hours that week.

ARTlCLE 12
PERSONAL DAYS
Section I.
Each member shall receive four personal leave days per calendar year. One
personal leave day shall be earned during each one-quarter calendar year. Where practical, they
are to be granted at the option of the member. All requests for personal leave shall be approved
or disapproved no later than 10 working days prior to the commencement of the requested leave.
No request for personal leave shall be unreasonably denied. Members may anticipate personal
leave to which they may become entitled during the calendar year. Any member who anticipates
such leave and who subsequently terminates employment shall reimburse the Employer for those
days of personal leave used but not earned. The members shall be required to utilize two
personal days by June 30. If a member is required to work on a scheduled personal leave day
and is unable to reschedule the day by June 30, due to the demands of his/her work, a seven pay
period extension will be granted. Each calendar year, each member shall be entitled to designate
one ( l) day of his/her personal leave allotment as an emergency personal leave day which shall
not be denied
Section 2.
Personal leave shall be non-cumulative from calendar year to calendar year.
However, members will be permitted to carry over personal leave days into the first seven pay
periods of the next calendar year. Any days carried over in accordance with this Section which are
not scheduled and used during the first seven pay periods of the next calendar year will be lost.

10

Section 3.
For the purpose of this Article, the calendar year shall be defined as beginning with
the member's first full pay period commencing on or after January I and continuing through the
end of the member's pay period that includes December 31. For the purpose of this Article, the
calendar quarters shall be defined as beginning with the first full pay period in January through
March 31, April l through June 30, July 1 through September 30, and October I through the last
full pay period of the leave calendar year, which is the pay period that includes December 31.

ARTICLE 13
VACAT(ONS
Section I.

Members shall earn leave according to the following schedule:
Service

Maximum Annual Leave
Entitlement Per Year:

Less than 1 year:
Annual leave will be earned at the rate
of 3.85% of all Regular Hours Paid

40 Hour Workweek:
80 Hours (IO days)

Over 1 year to 13 years:
Annual leave will be earned at the rate
of 5. 77% of all Regular Hours Paid

40 Hour Workweek:
120 Hours (15 days)

Over 13 years to 21 years:
Annual leave will be earned at the rate
of7.70% of all Regular Hours Paid

40 Hour Workweek:
160 Hours (20 days)

Over 21 years:
Annual leave will be earned at the rate
of I 0% of all Regular Hours Paid

40 Hour Workweek:
208 Hours (26 days)

Regular Hours Paid as used in this Article include all hours paid except overtime, alert
time, call time and full-time out service training.
Members shall be credited with a year of service for each 26 pay periods completed in an
active pay status provided they were paid a minimum of one hour in each pay period.
Length of service for the purpose of detennining vacation earning rate shall include all
periods of service as a Commonwealth employee.

11

Section 2.
Annual leave may be carried over from one calendar year to the next to a maximum
of 60 days (480 hours). However, members will be pennitted to carry over annual leave in excess
of the sixty day limit into the first seven pay periods of the next calendar year. Any days carried
over in accordance with this Section which are not scheduled and used during the first seven pay
periods of the next calendar year will be lost. Members on disability leave who have been unable
to take their annual leave resulting in an excess carry-over at the end of the year shall be authorized
a seven pay period extension upon return from disability leave.

In the event that the carryover of accumulated vacation would include a fraction of a day,
the fraction will be rounded up or down to the nearest whole day.
All requests for annual leave shall be approved or disapproved no later than 10 working
days prior to the commencement of the requested leave.
Section 3.
A member shall have the right to have a minimum of four scheduled days off
(non-compensable) contiguous with his/her annual or any other leave to which he/she may be
entitled, provided that the scheduled compensable time off be at least five consecutive days in
duration.
Section 4.
A member's "Leave Period", which consists of at least five compensable non-work
days, shall be deemed to have commenced at the end of the last scheduled shift prior to the
scheduled leave and to end at the beginning of the member's first scheduled shift after leave has
expired.
Section 5.
If a member is recalled to work from approved annual or personal leave, the
member is entitled to compensation for a minimum of eight hours at the rate of time and one-half
for each day worked and the day will not be charged against the member's annual or personal
leave. The member will also be granted a compensatory vacation day at a later date for each
non-compensable day worked if he/she is recalled after a .,Leave Period" as defined in Section 4
above has commenced.
Section 6.
If a member has selected leave under a tentative leave schedule and the dates of
such leave were not refused when the tentative schedule was constructed, then any member who
has his/her leave or portion of leave canceled within 30 days of the scheduled commencement of
such leave shall be pennitted to reschedule such leave at a time of his/her choosing, provided it is
after the emergency that gave rise to the cancellation has ended and provided his/her request will
not cause cancellation of the scheduled leave of another member.
Section 7.
The requirement that no more than 10% of the members on a station can be off on
leave at the same time shall not be mandatory. Consistent with operational requirements, leave
requests shall not be unreasonably denied.

12

Section 8.
For the purpose of this Article, the calendar year shall be defined as beginning with
the member's first full pay period commencing on or after January 1 and continuing through the
end of the member's pay period that includes December 31.

ARTICLE 14
SICKLEAVE
Section 1.

Members shall earn sick leave in accordance with the following schedule:
Maximum Sick Leave
Entitlement Per Year

Sick Leave will be
earned at the rate
of 6% of all Regular
Hours Paid

40 Hour Workweek:
124.8 hours (15.6 days)

Regular Hours Paid as used in this Article include all hours paid except overtime, alert
time, call time and full-time out-service training.

Section 2.

Accumulation

Members shall be permitted to accumulate sick leave that is unused each year to a
maximum accumulation of 410 days (3280 hours).
Section 3.
Members may use up to five days of sick leave for the death of a spouse, parent,
stepparent, child, or stepchild and up to three days of sick leave may be used for the death of a
brother, sister, grandparent, step-grandparent, grandchild, step-grandchild, son- or daughter-in-law,
brother- or sister-in-law, parent-in-law, grandparent-in-law, aunt, uncle, foster child, step-sister,
step-brother, or any relative residing in the member's household.
Section 4.
Where sickness in the immediate family requires the member's absence from work,
members may use not more than five days of sick leave entitlement in each calendar year for that
purpose. Immediate family is defined as the following persons: husband, wife, child, step-child,
foster child, parent, brother or sister of such member. The Employer may require proof of such
sickness.

13

Section 5.
a.
Members who retire with less than 25 years of service shall be paid 35% of their
accumulated unused sick leave not to exceed 117 days. Part days shall not be paid. The eligible
dependents of a member who dies prior to retirement shall be paid 35% of the member's
accumulated unused sick leave at the time of his/her death not to exceed 117 days. Part days shall
not be paid.
b.
Members who retire with at least 25 years of service and eligible dependents of
members who are killed in the line of duty shall be paid for full days of accumulated unused sick
leave in accordance with the following schedule:
Days Available
At Retirement
0-135
136-235
236-335
over 335

Percentage
Buyout
35%
40%
50%
100%of
days over
335

Maximum
Days
47
94
167
75

Section 6.
In the event that a member is receiving Workers' Compensation, he/she shall be
permitted to utilize sick leave to provide the difference in biweekly compensation between the
monies received from Workers' Compensation and 100% of his/her normal biweekly
compensation. Under such circumstances, sick leave shall be deducted from the member's
accumulated sick leave in increments of one hour to equal the 100% maximum compensation.
Section 7.
In accordance with Section 6 above, members who are not receiving Heart and
Lung Act benefits may use sick leave to supplement Workers' Compensation benefits. The
Workers' Compensation supplement will be the difference between net salary and Workers'
Compensation and Social Security disability benefits (if applicable). Net salary is defined as gross
base pay minus applicable payroll taxes and retirement contributions. The Employer will continue
to remit appropriate payroll taxes and retirement contributions on behalf of the member. The hours
of sick leave charged biweekly while the supplement is payable will be calculated by subtracting
the Workers' Compensation amount from the member's regular gross pay and dividing the result by
the member's hourly rate of pay, rounded to the next highest hour.
Upon determination by the Employer that a member is entitled to the Workers'
Compensation supplement, the member will receive the supplement for a period of up to 30 days
or to the extent sick leave is available, during which time the member must elect to either continue
receiving the Workers' Compensation supplement or to retire. In the event the member retires
during the 30-day period, the member shall be paid for full days of accumulated unused sick leave
in accordance with Section 5.b. of this Article. In the event the member elects to continue the

14

Workers' Compensation supplement or makes no election within the 30-day period, the Workers'
Compensation supplement will continue until sick leave is exhausted or until the member retires,
whichever is earlier. If a member retires after the 30-day period, payment for accumulated unused
sick leave will be in accordance with Section 5.a. or 5.b. of this Article, as applicable.
Section 8.
For the purpose of this Article, the calendar year shall be defined as beginning with
the member's first full pay period commencing on or after January I and continuing through the
end of the member's pay period that includes December 31.

ARTICLE 15
MEDICAL LEA VE EXTENSION
Section 1.
A member who becomes disabled because of illness or an off-the-job accident shall
be entitled to six months of leave without pay, during which time his/her medical benefits,
supplemental health benefits, and Group Life Insurance shall continue in force and be paid for by
the Commonwealth.
Section 2.
A member who is granted parental leave without pay shall continue to receive
medical benefits, supplemental health benefits, and Group Life Insurance benefits which shall be
paid for by the Commonwealth for up to six months.
Section 3.
Any extension of leave under Section 1 or 2 above shall be without benefits and
shall be at the discretion of the Employer.
Section 4.
A member shall not be required to use accumulated sick, annual and/or personal
leave prior to the commencement of a leave without pay under this Article.

ARTICLE 16
LIFE INSURANCE
The Employer shall assume the entire cost of the currently existing life insurance plan. The
amount of insurance is based on the member's annual pay rate in effect on the preceding January I,
rounded to the nearest $1,000 but not to exceed $50,000.

1S

ARTICLE 17
SURVIVOR BENEFlTS
PSTA SCHOLARSHIP FUND
Section 1.
In the event a member is killed in the line of duty. the eligible dependents of the
deceased member shall be entitled to all medical benefits for the life of the spouse, or until
remarriage of the spouse. whichever is earlier and until age 19 (25 if enrolled full time as a student)
for the children.
Section 2.

PSTA Scholarship Fund

a.
As of July 1 of each year of the contract, the Commonwealth shall deposit Ten
Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) into an interest bearing account to be used for the purpose of
providing scholarship assistance to state-related schools for dependents of members who were
killed in the line of duty on or after July 1, 1988. The recipient. nature and amount of such
assistance shall be determined by a committee composed of one representative from the PSTA
and one designated by the Commissioner.
b.

Definitions
( 1)
"Eligible dependent" means the spouse. child. stepchild or legally
adopted child of a State Police member killed in the line of duty who
qualifies as a dependent under IRS guidelines.
(2)
"State-related schools" shall mean the following Pennsylvania
institutions of higher learning: Pennsylvania State University, University of
Pittsburgh, Temple, Lincoln, Bloomsburg. California, Cheyney, Clarion,
East Stroudsburg, Edinboro, Indiana, Kutztown, Lock Haven, Mansfield,
Millersville, Shippensburg. Slippery Rock or West Chester Universities.
(3)
"Killed in the line of duty" means any member whose death is
attributable to work-related circumstances and approved under Act 101-102
of 1981 and the Public Safety Officers' Benefit Act of 1976.
(4)
"Full-time student" shall mean a minimum course work load of at
least 12 credit hours per semester.
11
(5)
Approved program of higher education" shall mean scholarship
assistance for enrollment in a degree program at a state-related school for
eight semesters or the completion of a Baccalaureate degree, whichever
occurs sooner.

16

c.

Scholarship Assistance for Eligible Dependents

A committee has been authorized to establish guidelines for the purpose of administering a
scholarship assistance program pursuant to Section 2 of this Article.
Scholarship assistance shall be afforded to eligible dependents who are full-time students
enrolled in an approved program of higher education at a state-related school within the
Commonwealth. The student must meet admission requirements, must be accepted under the
current admissions policy for course work and must remain in good academic standing at the
completion of each semester, as defined by the institution of attendance. As a prerequisite to
approving any assistance, students must execute a waiver with the institution for the Committee to
be provided with a copy of the transcript of grades upon the completion of each semester.
d.

Amount of Scholarship

Scholarships awarded by the Committee will supplement available grants to the student and
shall not exceed the cumulative total of tuition and fees of $1,000 per semester or up to $2,000 per
academic year, whichever is the lesser.
Before becoming eligible for scholarship assistance, the student must apply for and declare
all state and financial aid grants and authorize the Committee to receive and review any financial
aid transcripts on file with the institution.
e.

Miscellaneous

Further implementation and interpretation of the guidelines enumerated herein are reseived
to the Committee. The Committee reserves the right to change or amend the program subject to
adequate notice which shall be distributed to all members. The determination of the Committee
regarding interpretation of the guidelines is final.
f.
Effective upon the issuance of the 2012-2017 Award, the Commonwealth shall
have the right to cease annual funding for the Line of Duty Death Scholarship Fund. The residue
of the existing account shall be deposited into the Health and Welfare Fund.

17

ARTICLE 18
DISABILITY BENEFITS
Section 1.
If a member has been found to be eligible for a disability retirement and if the
disability has been found to be a permanent and total service-connected disability, such member
shall receive a supplement equal to 70% of Final Average Salary less the sum of the regular
disability retirement and the amounts payable under the Pennsylvania Workers' Compensation
Act, the Pennsylvania Occupational Disease Act and the Federal Social Security Act. The
service-connected disability retirement supplement will continue as long as the member is
determined to be permanently and totally disabled on account of the service-connected disability.
Section 2.
If a member becomes injured while on duty, during the time of his/her disability,
he/she shall continue to receive all benefits to which he/she would otherwise have become entitled,
including pay increases and accumulation of annual leave.

ARTICLE 19
HOSPITAL AND MEDICAL INSURANCE*
Section l.
Members shall have the choice of receiving 100% state-paid coverage either in the
present indemnity plan (Indemnity Plan), or a Managed Care Plan, except that all members hired on or
after April 21, 2005 shall only be eligible to participate in a Managed Care Plan.
Managed Care Plans: All members shall be offered a Preferred Provider Organization Plan (PPO
Plan), selected by the Commonwealth which shall have benefits equal to the existing Indemnity
Program. The PPO Program shall be offered on a statewide basis. In addition, the Commonwealth, at
its discretion, may contract with Health Maintenance Organization plans (HMO Plans) or Point of
Service plans (POS Plans) as optional alternatives for coverage in selected areas of Pennsylvania.
Where more than one Managed Care Plan is offered in an area, the member may select from among the
options.
The Indemnity Plan and the Managed Care Plans each must conform to its respective plan design
set forth in this Article. Each plan also must provide dependency coverage where the dependents of the
member qualify under the respective plan.
Section 2.

lndemnity Plan

The Indemnity Plan includes the Pre-certification Plan as described in the side letter
between the parties dated October 15, 1985. The Major Medical maximum for general medical
expenses shall be $1,000,000 provided, however, that coverage for all general cases will be
based upon the most cost effective but medically appropriate treatment alternative. A voluntary
case management program has been instituted for all phases of the hospital and medical program.
The plan will cover medically necessary air ambulance services at 100% of the provider's
charge.

18

The annual Major Medical deductible for the Indemnity Plan is $250 individual and $750
family.
Members participating in the Indemnity Plan also will participate in the Emergency
Counseling Plan (Article 24).
Section 3.

PPO Plans and POS Plans

In-Network
Annual Deductible
Member Coinsurance
Out-of-Pocket Maximum
Primary Care Copayment
Specialist Copayment
Outpatient Therapy Copayment
Emergency Room Copayment
Mental Health - Outpatient Visit
Lifetime Maximum
Out-of-Network
Annual Deductible

Member Coinsurance
Annual Out-of-Pocket Maximum
Emergency Room Copayment
Mental Health - Outpatient Visit
Lifetime Maximum

None
None; Plan pays 100%
None
$15 ($20 after hours)
$25
$15
$50, waived if admitted
$25, 60 visit limit per calendar year
Unlimited

$250 per individual and $750 per family (accrued
separately from in-network)
20% up to out-of-pocket limit
$1,500 ($3,000 per family), not including
deductible
$50, waived if admitted
50% coinsurance after deductible
$1,000,000

The PPO plan will provide female covered persons at 100% of the Preferred Professional
Provider Allowance for: (a) one routine gynecological examination each calendar year,
including a pelvic examination and clinical breast examination, and routine Pap smears in
accordance with the recommendations of the American College of Obstetricians and
Gynecologists; and (b) one screening and diagnostic Mammogram each calendar year, provided
that benefits for mammography are payable only if performed by a qualified mammography
service provider who is properly certified by the appropriate state or federal agency in
accordance with the Mammography Quality Assurance Act of 1992.

Section 4.

HMO Plans

In-Network
Annual Deductible
Member Coinsurance
Out-of-Pocket Maximum
Primary Care Physician Copayment
Specialist Copayment
Outpatient Therapy Copayment
Emergency Room Copayment
Mental Health - Outpatient Visit
Lifetime Maximum

Section 5.

None
None; Plan pays 100%
None
$15 ($20 after hours)
$25
$15
$50, waived if admitted
$25, 60 visit limit per calendar year
Unlimited

Coverage

Coverage under all of the medical plans shall cease on the date a member terminates
employment. For the purpose of this Section, termination does not include retirement or death.
The Commonwealth shall pay the cost of coverage as outlined above.
Members shall have the right to choose among the various plans offered during each open
enrollment period which shall take place on no Jess than an annual basis for each.
Section 6.
Between the date of this Award and October 31, 2013, the parties, through their
respective representatives on this arbitration panel, shall reach agreement on the parameters of a
disease management program which shall include (a) annual health risk assessments and
biometric screenings (height, weight, blood pressure, non-fasting cholesterol and glucose level)
for members; and (b) health coaching and health management for participants at risk for serious
and/or chronic diseases and conditions. If the parties are unable to agree upon the parameters of
such a program by October 31, 2013, the Panel shall reconvene to establish the parameters of
such a program.
The program shall be communicated to members at least 60 days in advance of the
effective date of the program (with a target start date within the first half of calendar year 2014).
The current health reimbursement arrangement (HRA) shall continue in effect with a base
annual (calendar year) Commonwealth contribution of $300 per member. However, member
participation in the disease management program (completion of health risk assessment and
biometric screening between January I st and April 30th of each year after program
implementation) and compliance with health coaching and counseling (where indicated) shall
earn the member an additional HRA contribution of $50 in the following calendar year.

20

Should a member fail either to (a) complete the annual health risk assessment and
biometric screening by the required deadlines in each applicable calendar year (after initiation of
the program), or (b) participate in health coach/counseling when required to do so under the
disease management program, the member shall lose $50 of the next calendar year's HRA
contribution.

ARTICLE 20
PRESCRIPTION DRUG PLAN*
Section 1.
a.
The Commonwealth shall continue to provide the following prescription
drug benefits to members and their eligible dependents: Drugs which by State or Federal law may
be purchased only by prescription, insulin when written on a prescription form, oral contraceptives,
and allergy extracts or antigens when not dispensed and administered by the same physician and
drugs that are prescribed to treat injuries that members may incur as a direct result of Pennsylvania
State Police employment.
The co-payments for all prescriptions covered by this program shall be:
Retail - 30 day supply

Generic - $5
Preferred Brand -$1 O
Non-Preferred Brand - $15

Mail Order - 90 day supply

Generic - $10
Preferred Brand - $20
Non-Preferred Brand - $30

In addition, medical necessity and mandatory generic features will be added to the
program.
The Commonwealth shall pay the cost of the coverage as outlined above.
b.
Effective August 1, 2013, the current prescription drug program shall be changed:
( 1) to provide coverage only for prescription drugs and supplies that are necessary to treat medical
conditions and to exclude prescription drugs and supplies to treat lifestyle and cosmetic conditions;
(2) to limit mail order prescriptions to a 90-day supply, rather than 180-day supply; and (3) to
require dispensing of generic drugs where (a) a chemically-equivalent generic drug is available in
the place of a brand name drug and (b) the prescribing physician has indicated on the prescription
that substitution of a generic drug is permissible. If the prescribing physician has indicated that
substitution of a generic drug is permissible and the member/patient requests that the brand name
drug be dispensed, the member/patient shall be responsible for the brand name drug copayment as
well as an ancillary charge equal to the difference between the ingredient cost of the brand name
drug and the generic drug.

21

Section 2.
The Commonwealth shall have the right to implement the specialty
phannaceutical program administered by Express Scripts, Inc., currently referred to as
..CuraScript." Pursuant to this program, all prescriptions identified as a specialty pharmacy
prescription under the CuraScript program will be referred to and filled by a CuraScript facility.
Further, as part of the CuraScript program, members may be contacted by CuraScript
representatives, by way of example only, to conduct health coaching, to inquire about the
effectiveness of medications, to assess side-effects, to monitor member progress, or to arrange
for the delivery of medications.

ARTICLE21
VISION CARE PLAN *
The Commonwealth shall provide the following vision care benefits to members and their
eligible dependents: eye exams at 100% UCR, single vision lenses at $22, bifocal lenses at $36,
bifocal lenses at $57, aphakic lenses at $80, medically necessary hard contacts at $100, medically
necessary soft contacts at $150, cosmetic contacts at $52 and frames at $30. Dependents under age
19 are eligible for examination and lenses once during a 12-month period. Members and
dependents 19 and older are eligible for examination and lenses once during a 24-month period.
Members and dependents of any age are eligible for one set of frames in any 24-month period.
The Commonwealth shall pay the cost of the coverage as outlined above.

ARTICLE22
DENTAL CARE PLAN *
The Commonwealth shall continue to provide members and their eligible dependents with
a dental care plan at I00% UCR for basic diagnostic and preventive work, restorations,
endodontics, periodontics, oral surgery, prosthodontics and orthodontics. Effective January 1,
2009, the Commonwealth will pay 70% ofUCR for orthodontics, and members and their eligible
dependents will be subject to a coinsurance rate of 30%. Also effective January I, 2009, the
orthodontic lifetime maximum amount payable for dependent children shall be $1250.
The Commonwealth shall pay the entire cost of coverage as outlined above.

22

ARTICLE23
HEALTH REIMBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENT *
All members shall be enrolled in a Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA) in the
amount of $250 per calendar year per member. The HRA may be used to pay for medical
expenses that are eligible under Section 213 of the Internal Revenue Code that were incurred by
the member or any dependent who was covered under the member's health and/or supplemental
benefits at the time the claim was incurred. Unused balances in the HRA will carry forward into
the next calendar year. Upon termination of employment for reasons other than disciplinary
discharge, former members may continue to submit claims until all unused balances in their
HRA are used. The account shall be administered by the Commonwealth or by a third-party
administrator selected at the Commonwealth discretion.
Effective January 1, 2009, the annual HRA amount shall be increased to $300 per year
and shall remain at that amount for the balance of the term of the agreement.
Those members who chose to remain in the Indemnity Plan shall not be eligible to submit
for reimbursement to the HRA those expenses that would have been covered under the now
eliminated Doctor Office Visit Plan (formerly Article 23).

ARTICLE24
EMERGENCY COUNSELING PLAN *
Section I.
The Commonwealth shall provide members who chose to participate in the
Indemnity Program and their eligible dependents with emergency mental health psychotherapy
services.
Section 2.
This benefit provides 12 medically necessary psychotherapy visits for each member
and each eligible dependent per contract year. A member or dependent may use a licensed
psychologist or psychiatrist of his/her choice and claims will be processed under the following
conditions:
a
If a participating provider is chosen, payment will be made in full and the member
or dependent will have no out-of-pocket expenses.

b.
If a non-participating provider is chosen, the member or dependent could
experience some out-of-pocket expenses. The difference between the provider's charge and the
Blue Shield allowance will not be eligible under Major Medical.
c.
The medical plan has the right to investigate claims and only those deemed
medically necessary will be covered.

23

d.

Psychiatric evaluation services will not be covered.

Payment shall not be made under the ECP for visits covered under Workers'
Compensation.

*

For a complete description of these benefits, including their limitations, exclusions and
maximums, refer to the State Police Health Benefits Program Handbook

ARTICLE25
RETIREMENT
Section 1.
All medical, dental and prescription (except as provided in Section 2 below)
coverage in effect at the time of retirement are to continue until the death of the retiring member,
provided the member retires under the following conditions:
a.

Superannuation retirement (excluding vestees) or retirement with at least 25 years
of service.

b.

Disability retirement.

c.

Retirement with at least 20 but less than 25 years of service, with at least 10 years
of enlisted service with State Police (Military time, civilian service and service
with another agency are not considered service with the State Police).

Section 2.
For members who retire after July 1, 1995, the Retiree Major Medical Program
shall not provide prescription drug benefits. Those benefits shall be provided solely by the
prescription drug program carried into retirement.
Section 3.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, a member, regardless of age, may
also retire on or after July 1, 1989 with all health benefits that are currently carried into retirement
under the following conditions:
a.

At 50% of the highest year salary after 20 years of service; or

b.

At 75% of the highest year salary after 25 years of service.

24

ARTICLE26
DISClPLINE
Section 1.

Probationary Period

All Troopers shall serve a probationary period of 18 months from the date of original
enlistment, during which time they may be dismissed by the Commissioner for violations of rules
and regulations, incompetency, and inefficiency without action of a Court-Martial Board, the right
of appeal to a civil court, or the grievance procedure.
Section 2.

Suspension Without Pay

A member shall not be suspended without pay unless the conduct falls within the purview
of the Governor's Code of Conduct or the member is notified of dismissal after selecting the
grievance procedure or recommendation for probationary review.
In disciplinary cases that could reasonably be construed to result in termination other than
those referenced in the above paragraph, the Department shall limit suspensions without pay
pending investigation of the conduct to no more than 20 working days. If, upon expiration of the
20 working day period of suspension without pay, the Department has not completed its
investigation, the member shall be placed on suspension with pay, be returned to restricted duty
status, and/or be temporarily reassigned or transferred to a reasonably situated station or
assignment, until such time as the Notice of Disciplinary Penalty has been issued. The
Department, at its discretion, may elect which of these options to utilize in any given case. The
use of these options by the Department shall not prevent subsequent disciplinary action from
being taken, and any subsequent disciplinary action shall not constitute double jeopardy; nor
shall the use of these options be used as a defense in any subsequent disciplinary proceeding.
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to impose temporal or other limits on the
Department's right to impose suspension without pay as a form of disciplinary penalty.
Section 3.

Fringe Benefits During Suspension Without Pay

A member suspended without pay who has not been charged with a felony or misdemeanor
under the laws of the United States, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, any other state(s) of the
United States, and/or subdivisions thereof, shall continue to receive the benefits provided under the
State Police Health Program, the State Police Supplemental Benefits Program, and the Group Life
Insurance Program during the period of suspension until such time as the cost of the benefits paid
equals the amount of the member's accumulated retirement deductions and interest, plus the
amount of all eligible leave payouts; at such time, the above benefits will terminate. If the member
elects not to file a grievance, or the grievance is denied wholly or in part, for any reason, the
member shall reimburse the Commonwealth for the cost of the benefits within 90 days of the final
disposition or upon separation from the Department, whichever shall occur sooner. The member

25

will be required to repay the Commonwealth for the cost of such benefits as follows:
a.

For the State Police Health Program and the State Police Supplemental Benefits
Program, the member will pay the monthly individual or multiparty premium that is
charged to COBRA subscribers during the period of the suspension, minus the 2%
administrative charge;

b.

For the Group Life Insurance Program, the member will pay the monthly
contribution rate that the Agency would have paid during the period of suspension.
Such premiums will be paid whether or not any actual claims were incurred during
the period of the suspension.

Suspensions of members who have been charged criminally with misdemeanors or felonies
under the laws of the United States, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, any other state(s) of the
United States, and/or subdivisions thereof, shall be reviewed by the Office of Administration on a
case-by-case basis, in consultation with the PSTA and the Department, as necessary, to determine
whether benefits will continue in accordance with the provisions of this Section. A decision will
be rendered as soon as possible, but not later than 20 working days from the date the Department is
notified of the filing of charges in the case of a member who has been charged criminally with a
felony or work-related misdemeanor and not later than 20 working days from the date the
Department notifies the member that the member is being suspended in the case of a member who
has been charged criminally with a non work-related misdemeanor. If the aforementioned time
limits are exceeded, benefits will continue in accordance with the provisions of this Section. The
determination of the Office of Administration will not be subject to the grievance and arbitration
procedures.
Benefits during suspensions of one full pay period or less shall be processed in accordance
with the current practice.
Section 4.

Court-Martial Board

Court-martial proceedings shall provide that the accused may name, or designate the PST A
to name, one of the three members of the Court-Martial Board.
Section 5.

a.

Rights
A member shall be advised of their Garrity/Miranda Rights when applicable.

b.
A member who is the subject of an administrative inquiry or internal investigation
shall be advised of and upon request, be afforded PST A representation at any interview,
predisposition conference, DAR issuance, or any hearing.

26

c.
Absent exigent circumstances, the member shall receive reasonable notice to
arrange for PSTA representation and the member shall be required to arrange such representation
within a reasonable time period. However, this does not give the interviewee the right to a specific
representative, only to one that is nearest and most readily available.
d.
Any member who is interviewed in regards to an investigation and has reason to
believe that their statements could result in administrative action being taken against them, shall be
afforded PSTA representation if requested.
e.
A member, prior to the issuance of a DAR, shall be afforded the rights under
Article 28, Section 2 of the grievance procedure.
f.
If a tape recording is made by the interviewer, a copy shall be furnished to the
member upon written request within 15 working days of the completion of the interview of the
subject of the investigation. In cases involving multiple subjects of investigation, the tape
recording shall be furnished within 15 working days after the last interview is completed. During
tape recorded interviews, members shall also be permitted to simultaneously tape record the
interview consistent with those procedures jointly agreed to between the parties.

g.
Upon the issuance of a DAR, the PSTA shall be given all information, evidence,
reports and statements obtained by the Department related to the charge or charges; provided,
however, that the Department shall not be obligated to tum over any information, evidence,
report or statement that may compromise, interfere with, or otherwise impede any other
investigation by another law enforcement agency or the Pennsylvania State Police, including for
example the names of confidential witnesses.
No later than 15 calendar days prior to any arbitration hearing, the Commonwealth and
the Union shall exchange ( l) all available information, evidence and all complete statements, to
the extent created in the course of preparing the case, for any person who may testify; and (2) the
names of all persons who will testify including a statement of the subject matter of each
witness's testimony.

If any of the above has not been exchanged, it may not be used by the non-producing
party at the hearing; provided, however, that information which was not available or was
discovered after the deadline for exchange of information may be used if it has been provided to
the other party as soon as possible after discovery.
Section 6.

Required Correspondence

When requested a member who is involved in or witness to an incident or is the subject of a
complaint allegation, other than allegations of criminal conduct, shall record all the known facts of
the involved incident in writing and direct it to their Commanding Officer or other designated
authority. The request for all required correspondence shall be made to the member prior to any

27

interview. Absent exigent circumstances, a member will be provided two working days to submit
said correspondence. If further information/ clarification is subsequently required, the member
shall be given specific questions to be answered.
Section 7.

Statute of Limitations

[n cases of alleged criminal conduct, cases which could reasonably be construed to give
rise to court-martial proceedings, alleged violations of the Governor's Code of Conduct, or cases in
which a prosecutorial determination is sought, the Department shall complete its investigation and
the member advised of the Troop Commander/Bureau Director's notice of administrative findings
within 120 calendar days. The 120 calendar days will commence on the date the member is
notified of the complaint, except as provided below:
a.

ln cases involving alleged criminal conduct or requests for a prosecutorial
determination, the notice of administrative findings shall be issued within 90
calendar days from the date the Department receives written notice from the
member of the disposition/adjudication of the criminal charge or the date the
Department receives the prosecutorial determination.

b.

In all other cases the Department shall complete its investigation and the member
advised of the Troop Commander/Bureau Director's notice of administrative
findings within 120 calendar days of the date the Department is notified of the
complaint.

c.

ln court-martial cases the member shall be notified of the adjudicated penalty
within 45 calendar days of the member's selection of the grievance procedure.

d.

( 1)

The Department Disciplinary Officer shall seek to issue a Notice of
Disciplinary Penalty, if any, in all non-court-martial cases within sixty (60)
calendar days of issuance of the DAR, but in no case shall such notice be
issued more than ninety (90) calendar days from issuance of the DAR.

(2)

The Department Disciplinary Officer shall seek to issue a Notice of
Disciplinary Penalty, if any, in all court-martial cases within ninety (90)
calendar days of issuance of the DAR, but in no case shall such notice be
issued more than 120 calendar days from issuance of the DAR.

If the aforementioned time limits are not met, no discipline in the form of a
suspension without pay may be initiated. However, the time limits may be waived
by the Department upon a showing of just cause or by mutual agreement of both
parties.

28

Except in cases alleging criminal conduct or cases which give rise to court-martial
proceedings, no disciplinary action consisting of a suspension without pay shall be imposed for
violations of Department rules and regulations which are discovered more than one year after the
date of occurrence unless mandated by the Governor's Code of Conduct. This paragraph shall not
apply upon a showing of proof that the member acted to prevent such discovery.
Section 8.

Purging of Files

If a member is found not guilty of the charges, any information contained in the member's
official personnel folder and Troop/Bureau personnel file shall be purged within 30 days of the
findings and all purged material returned to the member. Unfounded, not sustained, policy void, or
withdrawn investigations shall not be used for consideration in evaluations or specialized position
selections.
All other purging shall be in accordance with established practice.
Section 9.

Receipt of Complaints

An investigator, upon being assigned to conduct an internal investigation as the result of
a citizen complaint, shall complete a complaint verification and shall request the complainant's
signature attesting to the veracity of the complaint as set forth. Except in cases where criminal
conduct is alleged or cases which could reasonably be construed to give rise to court-martial
proceedings as determined by the Disciplinary Officer, no disciplinary charges shall be brought,
nor shall the Department treat any member as subject to disciplinary charges, prior to either a
signed verification of allegations against the member or in the absence of a signed verification,
evidence corroborating the allegations

Section 10.

Outside Employment

A member who is suspended without pay and submits a Request for Approval of
Supplementary Employment will be notified of the approval or denial within three working days of
the Department's receipt of any such request. The member may submit the request directly to the
Director, Bureau of Human Resources by the most expedient means available; e.g., FAX, express
mail, etc. The Department's reply shall be sent to the PST A by the most expedient means
available. If the Department fails to respond to the PSTA within the time limitations, the member's
request shall be considered approved.
A member who has a previously approved Request for Supplementary Employment, and is
suspended without pay, may engage in the approved supplementary employment, and except as
required by law, shall not be required to offset reimbursement if the member is found not guilty of
all charges.

29

Section 11.

Definitions

The term member shall include probationary Troopers except where excluded.
Section 12.

Discipline Standards

Disciplinary standards regarding termination of employment for certain specified
offenses are contained in Appendix E.
ARTICLE 27
LEGAL COUNSEL
Section 1.
If a member is charged with a criminal action as a result of the member's having
acted within the scope and responsibility of his/her office, he/she shall select local counsel in
consultation with his/her Commanding Officer. The Commonwealth shall pay for the fees of
such counsel to the extent the fees are in line with prevailing rates in the area.
Section 2.
If a member is a defendant in a civil suit as a result of the member's having acted
within the scope and responsibility of his/her office, the Commonwealth shall immediately
furnish counsel and defend the member.
Section 3.
The Commonwealth shall be responsible for judgments rendered against the
member in job-related suits where the member has acted within the scope and responsibility of
his/her office.
Section 4.
ln order to expedite the determination contained in this section, arbitrations
regarding a dispute under this Article shall be determined pursuant to the labor arbitration rules of
the American Arbitration Association with lists provided in each case by the Philadelphia office of
the American Arbitration Association.

ARTICLE28
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Section 1.

Scope

Grievances are limited to matters involving interpretation of this Agreement including all
matters of discipline, and grant or termination of Heart & Lung Act benefits, compensation and
reimbursement under FR 4-1, Loss of or Damage to State Property and Equipment if in excess of
$250, and FR 5-1, Travel and Subsistence.

30

Section 2.

Rights

a.
Prior to the issuance of a DAR to a member at the Troop/Bureau level, the Troop
Commander/Bureau Director will notify the member in writing of the pending action and furnish
the member with a summary of any justification or information pertaining solely to the member,
including but not limited to statements of all witnesses as well as copies of any test results being
considered for use in the issuance of the proposed DAR.
Exception: The names of confidential witnesses shall not be released.
b.
Upon notification the member will have three working days to request a meeting
with the Troop Commander/Bureau Director. During this meeting, the member shall provide all
known information (such as but not limited to additional names of witnesses or other specifics)
which might mitigate or alter the decision to issue the DAR. The member shall be permitted local
PSTA representation for such meetings, if so desired. The member assumes responsibility for
arranging such representation within 24 hours.
c.
The member and/or PSTA representative may, during this meeting, take notes and
ask questions to determine the accuracy and relevancy of the information presented. The meeting
will be held within five working days of the member's request.
Section 3.

Grievance Steps

STEP 1.
The member, either alone or accompanied by a PST A representative, or the
PSTA where entitled, shall present the grievance in writing to the member's Troop
Commander/Bureau Director within 1S calendar days of its occurrence or knowledge of its
occurrence.
Within 10 calendar days, the Troop Commander/Bureau Director or his/her designee shall
conduct a hearing and provide a written STEP 1 decision to the member or the PST A
representative.

If additional information is provided by the member or the PSTA representative, the time
limits may be extended an additional five calendar days to review or further investigate the data.
Prior to the grievance submission to STEP 2, the grievance may be amended by the member or the
PST A representative.
A member may appeal discipline beginning at STEP 2 of the grievance procedure, within
15 calendar days of the notice of discipline the member receives from the Disciplinary Officer.
The grievance must be presented in writing and received or postmarked to the Office of
Administration, Bureau of Labor Relations within the 15 calendar day period to be considered
timely.

31

STEP 2.
In the event the grievance has not been satisfactorily resolved in STEP 1,
written appeal, if made, shall be by the member or PST A to the Office of Administration, Bureau
of Labor Relations, 404 Finance Building, Harrisburg, PA 17120. The written appeal shall be
made and postmarked within five calendar days of the Troop Commander's/Bureau Director's
STEP 1 written decision. The written appeal to STEP 2 shall contain a copy of the grievance and a
copy of the STEP I decision. Discipline grieved directly to STEP 2 shall also include a copy of the
grievant's DAR, the grievant's response, if applicable, notification of disciplinary action, the
grievant's proposed witnesses and all other supporting documents. A copy will also be sent to the
PSTA President, 3625 Vartan Way, Harrisburg, PA 17110.

Upon receipt of the grievance at STEP 2, either the representative from the Bureau of
Labor Relations or the PST A Grievance Board Chairman shall schedule a grievance committee
meeting consisting of members from the Employer (no more than five) and the PSTA Grievance
Board (no more than five). The joint committee shall meet at least one day per month, unless the
parties mutually agree otherwise.
The grievance committee shall meet for the purpose of reviewing the grievance(s)
previously denied in writing at STEP I and appealed to STEP 2 and matters of discipline grieved
directly to STEP 2. A list of grievances to be discussed shall be sent to the Bureau of Labor
Relations' representative and the Director, Bureau of Human Resources, Pennsylvania State Police
by the PSTA Grievance Board Chairman, within seven calendar days, when possible, prior to the
grievance committee meeting.

STEP3.
If the grievance is not satisfactorily resolved by the grievance committee at
STEP 2, the grievance may be scheduled for arbitration by the PSTA Grievance Board Chairman
by serving upon the Bureau of Labor Relations' representative notice, within 10 calendar days of
the grievance committee meeting, of its intent to proceed to arbitration. The Bureau of Labor
Relations representative and the PST A Grievance Board Chairman shall determine hearing dates
and arbitrator availability.
The Employer's decision at STEP 1 and the Committee's decision at STEP 2 shall not be
used as a precedent for any subsequent case.
Section 4.

Grievance Processing

An aggrieved member and PST A representative, if member, and a reasonable number of
witnesses, when required, shall be granted reasonable time during working hours, if required, to
process grievances in accordance with this Article without loss of pay or leave time.

32

Section 5.

PST A Representation

The PST A must have an opportunity to appear with the grievant at all steps of the
grievance procedure. Subsequent to the issuance of the Disciplinary Officer's letter of adjudication
the PSTA shall have the right to investigate all issues not incorporated within an investigation
against a member, provided the issue has been brought to the attention of the Department and the
Department chooses not to investigate the issue. Such follow-up investigation shall occur during
off-duty hours, a member's badge of office shall not be used, and any expenses incurred therewith
shall be borne exclusively by the PSTA.
Section 6.

Grievance Resolution

The PST A Grievance Board shall have the authority to settle or withdraw any grievance
which does not have merit, does not comply with the time frames stated previously above, or does
not comply with the guidelines established by the PST A.
Section 7.

Arbitrator and Site Selection

Five neutral arbitrators are to be selected by the parties jointly to hear cases in the above
procedure.
Either party may, at any time, remove a neutral arbitrator, selected by the parties, after
giving the other party at least 15days notice.
When a vacancy exists on the list of arbitrators, the parties should attempt to agree on a
replacement within 10 calendar days. If the parties cannot agree, the parties shall request the
American Arbitration Association to submit a list of seven arbitrators. Upon receipt of such list,
the parties shall alternately strike until one arbitrator needed to fill a vacancy remains. A new list
shall be requested from the American Arbitration Association for each arbitrator to be selected.
Only one arbitrator is to be selected from each list. The Commonwealth shall strike first.
The parties may mutually agree to schedule a hearing at a location agreeable to both. For
discipline grievances, the hearing site will be at a neutral location within the geographical area of
the Troop where the grievance arose, unless mutually agreed otherwise.
When the parties cannot agree to a hearing location due to a disagreement over the nature
of the case, then the hearing site will be decided by the neutral arbitrator.

33

Section 8.

Arbitrator Responsibility

Issues concerning timeliness or procedurally defective cases or matters on arbitrability will
be decided prior to hearing the merits of the grievance. The arbitrator shall neither add to, subtract
from, nor modify the provisions of this Agreement or of the arbitration awards. The arbitrator shall
confine himselfi'herself to the precise issue submitted for arbitration and shall have no authority to
determine any other issues not so submitted to him/her. In those matters involving discipline for
actions specifically set forth in Article 26, Section 12, Appendix E, Subsections [I] - [ 12], the
arbitrator shall be limited to determining just cause and may not alter the penalty imposed by the
Department.
The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on both parties. The arbitrator shall
be requested to issue his/her decision within 30 days after the record is closed, but not to exceed 60
days.
If briefs are to be submitted, they must be postmarked within 15 working days of the
hearing or the arbitrator shall decide the case without the late party's brief.
All of the time limits contained in the Article may be extended by mutual agreement. If the
Commonwealth fails to respond in a timely manner in any step of the grievance procedure, the
grievant and/or the PST A may process the grievance to the next Step in the procedure.
All fees and expenses of the arbitrator shall be divided equally between the parties. Each
party shall bear the cost of preparing and presenting its own case. Either party desiring a record of
the proceedings shall pay for the record and make a copy available without charge to the arbitrator.
Section 9.

Heart and Lung Claims

Matters dealing with Heart & Lung shall be addressed in AR 4-4 as agreed to. Subsequent
changes in AR 4-4 Heart & Lung Procedures shall be subject to bargaining. Grievances arising
from the grant or termination of Heart & Lung Act benefits shall be subject to the Grievance
Procedure specified in this Article.
Section 10.

Reimbursement/Compensation Issues

All issues dealing with the application of compensation and reimbursement under FR 4-1,
Loss of or Damage to State Property or Equipment, and FR 5-l, Travel & Subsistence, as presently
written or modified by the Department, shall be submitted to a Board made up of one
representative from the Department, one from the Office of Administration and one from the
PSTA. The findings of the Board shall be final and binding for Loss of or Damage to State
Property or Equipment involving $250 or less. In all other cases arising under this Section, the
decision of the Board shall be subject to the Grievance Procedure specified in this Article, except
that grievances should be submitted directly to Step 2.

34

It is understood by the parties that the Board/Arbitrator shall have no authority to amend
the Commonwealth's travel regulations.
Section 11.

Grievance/Court-Martial Procedure Selection

In the event a member is accused of an offense that would otherwise be subject to courtmartial proceedings under Article 26, he/she shall be advised as follows:
Subsequent to the issuance of a DAR by the Troop Commander, if the Disciplinary
Officer, with the concurrence of the Deputy Commissioner of Administration and
Professional Responsibility, directs that the member be court-martialed, the following
shall apply for the selection of either court-martial procedure or grievance procedure:

Section 12.

a.

The member will receive written notice (form) that he/she may elect to
challenge the accusation either through the court-martial procedure or the
grievance procedure within seven calendar days. When made, the election shall
be irrevocable. If not made in a timely manner, it shall be conclusively
presumed that the member has elected the grievance procedure.

b.

The written notice (form) will state no matter which procedure the member
selects, he/she is subject to disciplinary action up to and including but not
limited to dismissal, transfer, reduction in rank and/or potential suspension in
excess of 30 days.

c.

If the member selects the court-martial procedure, a request will be made of the
Governor to convene such proceedings at which time charges and specifications
will be issued, in writing, to the member.

d.

If the member selects the grievance procedure, the Commissioner will
determine the appropriate penalty, and a written notice will be issued to the
member stating the disciplinary action to be taken and the underlying facts in
support thereof in accordance with the timeframes in Article 26, Section 7 c.
(2). After receiving the Commissioner's decision the normal grievance
procedure will then apply.
Penalty Imposition

Subject to the provisions of Article 26, Section 5, Subsection g, a penalty of suspension
without pay shall be implemented at any point in time following receipt of the Notice of
Disciplinary Penalty by the member accused of misconduct. The implementation of the penalty
can be delayed upon mutual agreement of the parties.

35

Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of Sections 11 and 12 herein above, where
removal from duty is required at any time due to the nature of the offense, the Department may
suspend a member in accordance with Article 26, Section 2.
Section 13.

Administrative Leave

Administrative leave shall be for the time that coincides with the grievant's or witnesses'
work schedule, not to exceed a full shift. On the day of the hearing, the grievant/witness shall be
scheduled on a day shift (a shift for which shift differential is not paid). For this accommodation,
no overtime can be charged by the grievant/witness in respect to other sections of this contract.
A grievant and/or witnesses, when required to travel a distance exceeding 100 miles from
his/her regular station to the arbitration site, shall not be required to work a shift commencing after
8:00 a.m. the day prior to the arbitration hearing date unless a clear and present danger/emergency
exists.
All witnesses granted administrative leave time shall be required to testify unless excused
mutually by the parties.
Requests for administrative leave shall be presented in writing to the Office of
Administration, Bureau of Labor Relations, at least 14 days prior to the arbitration hearing date,
except for unforeseen circumstances, in which case leave shall not be unreasonably denied.
Up to five members appointed by the PST A to serve on the Grievance Board shall receive
sufficient time to review grievances and attend STEP 2 Grievance Committee meetings without
loss ofleave or compensation. It is agreed that all members appointed by the PSTA shall be active
members.
Section 14.

Annual Review

The Commonwealth and the PSTA shall meet yearly to review the grievance procedure.
The procedure can be modified at any time by agreement between the parties.
Section 15.

Agreement

The foregoing represents the parties' entire agreement with regard to Article 28, Grievance
Procedure, and any previous side-letters concerning this Grievance Procedure Article are no longer
in effect.
Section 16.

Definitions

The term member shall include probationary Troopers except where excluded.

36

Section 17.

Expedited Arbitration Procedure

In any case where (I) a disciplinary penalty has been imposed on a member following
service of a Notice of Disciplinary Penalty, and (2) the PSTA has made a written demand for
arbitration to the Commonwealth's Bureau of Labor Relations within 10 calendar days of service
of the Notice upon the PSTA, the matter shall be heard before an arbitrator or a court martial
board within 61 calendar days following service of the Notice. In the event the matter is not
heard within that time period, and the delay is not attributable to the PSTA or the member, the
penalty must be rescinded until such time as an arbitrator sustains the penalty. Delays
attributable to the member or PSTA, including the failure to make a demand for or to schedule
the arbitration, shall not result in rescission of the penalty. Should the PSTA not make a written
demand for arbitration within the ten day time period, the right to arbitration shall be deemed to
have been waived.
To implement the 61 day requirement, the parties shall immediately appoint a panel of
arbitrators to be designated as the Disciplinary Arbitration Panel. The appointments shall be
made in accordance with Section 7 of this Article. The Disciplinary Arbitration Panel shall
consist of not less than seven arbitrators, which number may be expanded as the parties deem
necessary to satisfy the sixty-one day requirement. Each arbitrator shall provide the parties with
a minimum of two dates per every calendar month. Arbitrators appointed to the Disciplinary
Arbitration Panel shall serve two-year terms, but in no event shall an arbitrator be removed from
the Disciplinary Arbitration Panel without the mutual concurrence of the parties, prior to a date
24 months after the arbitrator's last appointment to the Panel. An arbitrator sitting on the Panel
shall render his or her decision within IO calendar days of the close of the hearing. Written
summations shall not be accepted from either party without the consent of the other. Should
written summations be submitted, they shall be received within 10 days of the hearing, at which
point the hearing will be deemed closed. In the event that notes of testimony are taken by a
reporter, the parties shall direct that the notes be transcribed and forwarded to the parties and the
arbitrator on an expedited basis and in no event more than 48 hours after the close of the
evidentiary hearing. A written opinion may be required of the arbitrator by either party and, if
required, shall be submitted within 30 calendar days of the close of the hearing.

ARTICLE29
ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE
Section 1.
For any interest arbitration, contract negotiation or preparation therefore under Act
111, all members of the PSTA negotiating committee (limited to a maximum of 15 persons) and
necessary witnesses shall have time off with pay (unless a present or threatened emergency
requires their services) as is reasonably necessary to complete the foregoing (including travel
time). Members shall provide reasonable notice of the request for such leave to the Employer.
Travel time shall be included in the requests.

3?

Section 2.
The President of the Pennsylvania State Troopers Association or his designee shall
have reasonable time off to handle and process grievances or other labor relations matters with
representatives of the Commonwealth. The President or his designee and necessary witnesses
shall be permitted to use administrative leave to attend a hearing before the Pennsylvania Labor
Relations Board. Any witnesses must actually testify before the Pennsylvania Labor Relations
Board or be excused from testifying by mutual agreement. A witness, when required to travel a
distance exceeding I 00 miles from his/her regular station to the site of the Pennsylvania Labor
Relations Board hearing, shall not be required to work a shift commencing after 8:00 a.m. the
day prior to the hearing date unless a clear and present danger/emergency exists.
Section 3.
No more than three duly elected representatives (which shall include officers and
committee members) of each Fraternal Order of Police Lodge will be permitted to attend three
two-day "Round Robins" in the year, without loss of pay, plus one-half day travel for distances
exceeding one-hundred (100) miles, when verified on the request by the Troop Commander.
Section 4.
A committee (numbering no more than seven members) may be designated by the
Pennsylvania State Troopers Association to meet two times a year with the State Police
Administration to discuss the Field Regulations Manual. The purpose of the meeting shall be to
provide the State Police Administration with information and suggestions concerning Field
Regulations. The proper utilization of this information is a matter for the State Police
Administration to determine.

ARTICLE30
UNION BUSINESS
Upon request by the PSTA, Union officers shall be released from duty. Union officers
released from duty pursuant to State law shall be paid by the Commonwealth at the amount
designated by the PSTA Board of Directors, not to exceed the rate of the highest ranking
member of the bargaining unit with appropriate longevity. Any amount paid by the
Commonwealth, including the cost of all benefits, shall be reimbursed by the PSTA to the
Commonwealth in accordance with law.

ARTICLE 31
PERSONNEL FILES
Members shall have access to their personnel files in accordance with the State Police
Administrative Regulation 4-8.

38

ARTICLE 32
CLOTHING MAINTENANCE
An allowance of $500 is granted to all members (uniformed and non-uniformed) for the
purpose of clothing maintenance. Effective July 1, 2011, the clothing maintenance allowance
shall be $600. This allowance is in addition to clothing benefits now enjoyed by members.
Payment is to be made at the discretion of the Commonwealth except that at least one-half is to
be paid during the first six months of the contract year.

ARTICLE 33
OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT
Section 1.
Members will be permitted to engage in outside employment under appropriate
circumstances. Outside employment shall not be limited to hardship cases and may take place
provided:
a. Prior authorization is obtained.
b. The scope of employment does not demean the image of the Pennsylvania State
Police.
c. There is no conflict with the member's primary duties.
d. The total amount of employment does not interfere with the member's ability to
perform his/her duties properly.
Section 2.
If a member submits a request for authorization to engage in outside employment,
the State Police Administration shall endeavor to respond to the request within one week. If the
member does not receive a reply within 30 days, the request shall be deemed to be granted.

ARTICLE 34
REDUCTION IN FORCE
Section 1.
In the event of a reduction in force, members will be laid off in accordance with the
inverse order of seniority on the basis of rank. If an officer (Corporal or above) is subject to layoff,
the person with the least seniority in that rank will be laid off first. That officer will then be
permitted to use his/her time as an officer for bumping into a lower officer classification. On the
basis of his/her Service Seniority he/she may bump into the rank of Trooper. The least senior
Trooper will then be laid off. Recall will be in the inverse order of the layoff. This provision must
be administered in accordance with any judicially imposed requirements.

39

Section 2.
Service Seniority for the purpose of layoff shall be computed as continuous service
from the date of enlistment. Where two or more persons have the same date of enlistment, the
seniority rank will be on the basis of the highest to lowest enlistment scores.

ARTICLE35
MEMBER TREATMENT
Section I.
The Employer agrees not to engage in or permit discrimination or harassment
against any member on the basis of race, creed, color, ancestry, sex, marital status, age, national
origin, disability, union membership, union activity or political affiliation.
Section 2.
Incidents which are at variance with this principle may be appealed through the
grievance and arbitration procedure. In cases of alleged harassment, the only remedy available
to the arbitrator shall be a cease and desist award.
If a subsequent alleged harassment arbitration involving the same parties results in a
cease and desist award, the member who has committed the act of harassment shall be subject to
progressive discipline by the Department. Further substantiated acts of harassment shall result in
more severe discipline.

ARTICLE36
TEMPORARY ASSIGNMENT
When a member is temporarily assigned the duties of a higher rank for five days or more in
any calendar quarter, then the member shall receive, retroactive to the time the assignment took
place, the difference between his/her regular rate of pay and the rate he/she would receive had
he/she been promoted to that rank. This amount will be in addition to the member's regular rate of
pay. If the member works the majority of hours on a shift, it shall be considered as a whole day at
the higher rank.
For the purpose of this Article, the calendar quarters shall be defined as beginning with the
first full pay period in January through March 31, April I through June 30, July I through
September 30, and October I through the last full pay period of the leave calendar year, which is
the pay period that includes December 31.

40

ARTICLE 37
SPECIALIZED POSITIONS AND TRAINING
Section 1.

Definitions

a.
For the purpose of this Article, a specialized position is one designated on
Troop/Bureau rosters as of January 1, 1997 which requires special training or ability that is not
required for basic patrol unit assignments whether the specialized position assignment is performed
on a permanent or part time basis.
b.
Exclusions to this Article are those specialized positions/assignments offered to all
members on a rotational basis, Areaffroop/Section/Station Commanders, Bureau/Division
Directors, Regional Commissioned Officers, positions under the Executive and Administrative
office, and positions under the Bureau of Integrity and Professional Standards. Also included in
these exclusions are those members assigned to Executive Services.
Section 2.

Posting

a.
Prior to posting a Specialized Position Vacancy, the Troop Commander/Bureau
Director has the option to offer the vacancy to members already serving in that same specialty
within the Troop/Bureau. The offer shall be made to all incumbents within the specialty via an
email from the Troop Commander/Bureau Director or designee. Incumbents will be given seven
(7) calendar days to respond by submitting a transfer request for the vacancy. The Troop
Commander/Bureau Director reserves the right to not transfer an incumbent due to operational
reasons. The reasons for such action must be provided to the incumbent member(s) in writing
within ten (10) calendar days of the Troop Commander's/Bureau Director's decision. In such
cases, the vacancy shall be posted in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.d.
If the transfer option is used and more than one incumbent in that specialty within the

Troop/Bureau submits a transfer request for the same vacancy, the senior member will receive
the transfer. If multiple vacancies exist, choice of vacancies will be offered by seniority.
Seniority for these purposes shall be the member's total time served in the specific specialty in
the Troop/Bureau. If a tie still exists, the member who was sworn in earliest as a Trooper will be
considered the most senior. If a tie still exists, the random number provided by the Department
will be applied as a tie breaker.
The Troop Commander/Bureau Director has the option to continue to offer any
subsequent specialized position vacancies created as a result of such transfers until such time as
no incumbents submit a transfer request. At that time, any remaining vacancies will be filled by
posting a Circular and completing a selection process.

41

The aforementioned procedure does not apply to specialized position vacancies if an
incumbent Altemate(s) exist. When an incumbent Altemate(s) exists, the procedure described in
Section 3.c. shall be used to fill the vacancy.
b.
For purposes of career development or temporary workload requirements
members may be assigned by the Troop Commander/Bureau Director to a 90 day rotation into a
specialized position. At the conclusion of the 90 day period, if the Department wishes to keep the
position filled, either a new member must be assigned to a 90 day rotation or the position must
be posted and filled in accordance with this Article.
c.
Vacancies for all specialized positions (with the exception of Section 2.a. and
2.b.) shall be posted electronically on the iNet for a period of at least 15 calendar days prior to
the selection process. During this time, qualified, interested members who have completed a
minimum of three years as an enlisted member may express their interest in the position.
d.
All postings shall contain a job description, any special qualifications or
requirements, the skills and abilities to be evaluated and the fact that particularized judgment may
be exercised. Where the appointing officer exercises particularized judgment in filling specialized
positions, that judgment will not be overturned unless it is shown to have been abused or based on
unlawful criteria.

e.

A copy of all postings shall be electronically forwarded to the PSTA at the time of

posting.
Unless there are operational reasons for not filling the position, the posted position shall be
filled from among the applicants deemed qualified through the selection process. Within 30
calendar days after the completion of the selection process, PSTA will be notified if the posted
position will not be filled.
Section 3.

Eligibility

a.
Any member who has been suspended within one year of the posting of a
specialized position or who has been removed from a specialized position in accordance with
Section 7.c. of this Article shall not be eligible to apply unless a standing list is being created.
When a standing list is being created, such members may apply but may not be selected until the
one year period or mandatory time limit, as applicable, has expired. Members who have
completed a minimum of three years as an enlisted member may express their interest in a
specialized position. When a standing list is being established, members who have completed
more than two years as an enlisted member may apply for the position. However, such members
will not be eligible for selection from the standing list until such time as they have completed
three years as an enlisted member.

4.2

b.
A member who has been notified that a preference transfer has been approved is
not eligible to be selected for a specialized position at the Troop he/she is departing. A member
may apply for a specialized position at their new Troop if the transfer effective date falls within
the posting period.
c.
Vacancies for specialized positions with incumbent Alternates shall first be filled
from members in those Alternate positions in the Troop/Bureau. If a single Alternate exists, no
posting is necessary unless the member declines the vacancy. If multiple Alternates exist, a
posting must be done (in accordance with Section 2. d.), but eligibility is restricted to current
Alternates. The normal selection procedure will then be used to select one of the Alternates for
the vacancy.

If the selected Alternate works at a minimally staffed station or other operational
limitations exist, release to the full time position may be delayed until the next lntertroop
transfers occur.
d.
Members on limited duty are eligible to apply for specialized positions. However,
such members must be released to full duty status by the SPMO prior to completion of the
selection process. Absent a release to full duty status by this deadline, the limited duty member
shall be deemed ineligible for selection. In the case of a standing list, limited duty members will
remain on the list, but will not be eligible for selection until after their release to full duty status.

e.
The Department shall determine the qualifications necessary for each specialized
position vacancy posted through a Circular. Experience from a source outside of PSP that
involves a license or certification, as well as post-secondary educational credits, may be
considered when determining if an applicant meets these qualifications. Other sources of
experience from outside PSP will not be considered when determining if an applicant meets
these qualifications. However, such experience can be considered during the Assessment of
Training and Experience component of the selection process provided the member is deemed to
be otherwise qualified for the specialty in question.
Section 4.

Reduction in Position

a.
Removal from a specialized position in a Troop/Bureau because of a reduction of
personnel in that position or elimination of the specialty shall be by least seniority in that specialty
in the affected station, unit or work locations providing all factors are equal.

43

b.
Removal from a specialized position for reasons other than as stated in subsection
a. above shall be for reasonable grounds. Notice of such removal shall be accompanied by a
written explanation setting forth the reasons. If a member wishes to appeal such decision to
remove, he/she may use the grievance and arbitration procedures set forth in Section 10 of this
Article. If a removal is for disciplinary purposes, the issue in the case shall be whether the
Department had just cause for removal. If a removal is for non-disciplinary purposes (for
example, performance in or non-suitability for the position), the issue in the case shall be
whether the Department had reasonable grounds for removal.
c.
When a member, who holds a specialized position, is in a status that precludes
him/her from performing the duties of that position for a period of eight weeks or more ( e.g.
limited duty, disability leave, sick leave, leave without pay, etc.), he/she shall be placed in an
inactive status in regard to the specialized position. The member will remain in an inactive status
until he/she is released to full duty status by the SPMO. The Department reserves the right to
issue a Circular for an Alternate to the specialized position on a temporary basis to ensure
operational efficiency. The member selected to the Alternate position will perform the
specialized position duties of the member that was placed in an inactive status, until such time as
that member is cleared by the SPMO to return to full duty status. NOTE: Circulars to fill such
Alternate positions on a temporary basis shall include language confirming that assignment to
the position shall end on the date the inactive member returns to full duty status and that the
Alternate position will be abolished. The member assigned to the Alternate position will return to
his/her previously held position/duties. In the event the member in an inactive status leaves the
Department, the member selected to the Alternate position will be placed into the full time
position on a permanent basis.
Section 5.

Non-Selection Notification

Where a standing list is used, the appointing officer shall, within 30 calendar days, provide
a written explanation to each of the members who did not qualify to be placed on the list. Where a
standing list is not used, the appointing officer shall, within 30 calendar days, provide a written
explanation to each of the non-selected members setting forth the reasons for non-selection.
Section 6.

Selection Procedure

a
A Troop Commander/Bureau Director may choose either a standing list or to post
vacancies on an as-needed basis.

b.
When a standing list is established, it shall be posted within IO calendar days after
the compiling of the list. The list shall stand for a period of one year or until the list is exhausted,
whichever comes first. The member with the highest absolute score in the selection process shall
be selected.
c.

Absolute score shall be calculated to the nearest whole number.

44

d.
are identical.

Seniority will be the determining factor in tie breaking only when absolute scores

e.
Seniority standing for selection purposes shall be the date the member was sworn in
as a Trooper when considered for a position as Trooper, Trooper/Corporal or
Trooper/Corporal/Sergeant. For postings requiring rank or ranks higher than Trooper, seniority
will be the date the lowest required rank was obtained.

f
Where score and seniority are tied, the random number provided by the
Department will be applied as a tie breaker.
g.
If no members apply for a specialized position vacancy or no members score high
enough to qualify during the selection process, the Troop Commander/Bureau Director may
appoint a member to fill the vacancy. No selection process is necessary in this situation, although
a written test should be administered to ensure the selected member is qualified. In cases of
Corporal or Sergeant vacancies, the position may be filled through the promotion process with
the concurrence of the Commissioner.
Section 7.

Required Time Limits

a.
Unless otherwise specified in the posting, all specialized positions will carry a
minimum time limit of three years which members are required to serve in the specialty.
b.
Exceptions to mandatory minimum time limits for specialties are promotion,
retirement or removal from the position.
c.
An incumbent may request removal by submitting an SP 3-201 to a Troop
Commander/Bureau Director which thoroughly outlines the reason for requesting removal from
the position. The final decision to grant or deny removal rests with the Troop Commander/Bureau
Director. The incumbent thus removed is ineligible to apply for another specialized position for
the duration of the mandatory time limit remaining since appointed or one year from the date of
removal from the position, whichever is less.
Section 8.

Selection Process

a.
A selection panel for all Bureau issued Circulars shall consist of a commissioned
officer and a non-commissioned officer, from the Bureau, selected by the Bureau Director. The
final member of the panel shall be selected by the PST A President. If the posting is for a Trooper
only, this selection shall be a Trooper from the Bureau. If the posting is for a Corporal or
Sergeant, this selection shall be a member from the Bureau of equal rank to the highest rank in
the posting. NOTE: If a Sergeant is not available to serve on panel for a Sergeant vacancy, a
Corporal that is not in the direct chain of command may be selected. If this selection is not made
within 14 calendar days of receiving the request, the Bureau Director shall make the
appointment. In the event a selection cannot be made within the Bureau, the PST A President
45

shall seek the concurrence of the Bureau Director to select a member from outside the Bureau.
b.
A selection panel for all Troop issued Circulars shall consist of a commissioned
officer and a non-commissioned officer, from the Troop, selected by the Troop Commander. The
final member of the panel shall be selected by the local Board of Directors member, or his/her
designee. If the posting is for a Trooper only, this selection shall be a Trooper from the Troop. If
the posting is for a Corporal or Sergeant, this selection shall be a member from the Troop of
equal rank to the highest rank in the posting. NOTE: If a Sergeant is not available to serve on
panel for a Sergeant vacancy, a Corporal that is not in the direct chain of command may be
selected. If this selection is not made within 14 calendar days of receiving the request, the Troop
Commander shall make the appointment. In the event a selection cannot be made within the
Troop, the local Board of Directors member shall seek the concurrence of the Troop Commander
to select a member from outside the Troop.
c.

The selection process shall consist of the following:
1.

A written test consisting of relevant subject matter to the specialty. A
maximum of 10 points applied. A member must receive at least seven
points to receive further consideration in the selection process.

2.

Interview process. A maximum of 10 points applied to entire process.
Questions used during the interview process shall be scored individually
by the panel members, and the average of those scores is to be used to
determine the total number points applied for the interview process.

3.

Assessment of training and experience. A maximum of 10 points applied.

4.

Evaluation of performance. A maximum of 10 points applied.
The evaluation shall be by at least two immediate supervisors who has
supervised the member for at least 90 days. Whenever possible, the
supervisor responsible for issuing an Employee Performance Review
(EPR) should be one of the supervisors. The use of the form located in
Appendix H shall be used for scoring purposes. The specific dimensions to
be evaluated can be revised on this form based upon the specific
requirements of the position being filled.

5.

When appropriate, a demonstration of ability relative to the position. A
maximum of 10 points applied.

46

Section 9.

6.

In cases where the "demonstration of ability" factor is used, the applicant
must achieve a minimum overall score of 35 points to be considered
eligible for selection. In all other cases, a minimum overall score of 28
points must be achieved by the applicant for him/her to be considered
eligible for selection.

7.

The Department may deviate from Section 8 with the agreement of the
PSTA.

Posting and Selection for Training

a.
Training which is not offered on a rotational basis or training which is offered to a
limited number of members in a specialty or unit shall be electronically posted at all affected work
locations for a period of at least 15 calendar days prior to selection of a member to attend. A
member who has been notified that a preference transfer has been approved is not eligible to be
selected for specialized training at the Troop he/she is departing. Such members are eligible to
apply for specialized training opportunities at the new Troop if the effective date of the transfer
falls within the posting period. Selection of commissioned officers to attend training is at the
discretion of the Commissioner.
When the Troop Commander/Bureau Director has not received sufficient notification of an
available training opportunity to meet the 15 day posting requirement, the time period may be
waived upon mutual agreement with the PSTA.
b.
Selection of a member shall be by seniority providing the senior member has not
(1) received the same or equivalent training previously, or (2) has not attended special training
within the past 180 calendar days, or (3) received a suspension within one year of the selection.
Seniority shall be time in the specialty or unit in the Troop/Bureau. [f seniority is tied, the tie
breakers shall be time in rank. [f a tie still exists, the member who was sworn in earliest as a
Trooper will be considered the most senior. The random number provided by the Department
will be applied as the final tie breaker, if necessary.
c.
[f a member grieves and is awarded the training, the member shall attend the next
available training that is equivalent or similar to the training grieved.
Section l 0.

Grievances

a.
Grievances relating to the interpretation, application and implementation of this
Article shall be filed at the first step of the Article 28 grievance procedure.
b.
Grievances which are pending and ready for a hearing shall be scheduled
independent of other scheduled grievances on a monthly basis for the purpose of adjusting
grievances under this section.

4?

c.

The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on both parties.

Section 11.
It is understood that the provisions of this Article are not applicable to
Commissioned Officers.
Section 12.
Members assigned to Specialized Positions shall be subject to a probationary
period of 12 months upon assignment to a specialized position. If a member is removed within
that time, such removal is not subject to grievance arbitration.

ARTICLE 38
TRANSFERS
Section I.
If a member is transferred not at his/her request, on a temporary transfer (less than
six months) and he/she is not provided transportation, he/she shall receive a travel allowance equal
to the IRS rate applicable in Pennsylvania for all miles in excess of 50 miles (driven miles) per day
from his/her place of residence to his/her station and return.
Section 2.
If a permanent involuntary transfer results in a subsequent involuntary transfer (the
permanent transfer lasting for less than six months) the above allowance shall be applicable
retroactively to the member.
Section 3.
a.
Except as provided in b. below, when an involuntary intratroop transfer
must be made, the member to be transferred must be the member who has the least seniority in
his/her rank in that station (provided he/she has not been moved involuntarily in the previous six
months) except in cases of promotion, in conjunction with the imposition of discipline or where
there is a need for special skills or specialty.
When the least senior member is transferred under this Section, the Department shall not be
required to consider the seniority of any member concurrently or subsequently transferred into that
station.
b.
Irrespective of seniority, the Department, on a temporary basis, can involuntarily
transfer a member intratroop when the member is the subject of an EEO, administrative or criminal
investigation which brings the member into actual conflict with other personnel at the work
location to the extent that it would interfere with the function of the work location. For the
duration of such involuntary transfer, should the distance between the member's place of residence
and his/her station be greater than 25 miles, the member shall be provided with transportation or a
travel allowance equal to the IRS rate applicable in Pennsylvania for all miles in excess of25 miles
each way.

48

ARTICLE 39
BADGE, RETIREMENT lD, HONORABLE DlSCHARGE UPON RETIREMENT
Section I.
All members with at least 15 years of Pennsylvania State Police service, including
intervening Military service, shall be awarded an Honorable Discharge and their badge and
retirement ID except upon a showing of just cause.
Section 2.
The Commonwealth shall provide each member who retires due to a serviceconnected disability and who has been honorably discharged with his/her badge and retirement ID
at no cost to the member.
Section 3.
On a prospective basis, and not affecting any litigation which is in progress or
which has been completed, the Honorable Discharge provisions of this Agreement shall not be
applicable to separations occurring prior to December 24, 2008. Members who retire must be
notified in writing within thirty (30) days of the first calendar month following retirement of the
granting or denial of Honorable Discharge.

ARTICLE40
CAR UTlLIZATION STUDY
The seven-member committee which was appointed by the Pennsylvania State Troopers
Association to meet periodically with the State Police Administration to discuss the feasibility of
developing a program to permit State Police officers to use State Police vehicles during off-duty
hours shall continue during the term of this Agreement.

ARTlCLE41
HEALTH CARE COST CONTAINMENT COMMITTEE
The joint committee which has been established for the purpose of investigating health care
cost containment issues shall continue during the term of this Agreement. The committee shall be
subject to the following provisions:
I.

The committee shall be comprised of not less than two nor more than four
representatives each from the Commonwealth and from the PSTA.

2.

The PSTA representatives shall be granted time off with pay (unless a present or
threatened emergency requires their services) as is reasonably necessary to
complete the foregoing (including travel time).

49

ARTICLE42
SPECIAL COMMITTEE - PROMOTION SYSTEM
The committee comprised of five persons to be selected by the PSTA and five persons to
be selected by the Commissioner shall meet and discuss on all issues related to the current
promotion system. The committee shall make written recommendations to the Commissioner.

ARTICLE43
SIDE LETTERS
The five letters dated November 15, 1979 signed by Gary M. Liglttman, Esquire for the
PSTA and Brian T. Baxter, Deputy Secretary for Employee Relations for the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania on the following subjects are hereby incorporated by reference: Pennsylvania State
Police Disability Benefit, Pennsylvania State Police Health and Welfare Fund, Continuation of
Benefits under the "Heart and Lung 11 Act, and Non-Service Connected Survivor Benefit (2 letters).
The provisions of these letters shall be applicable except as modified by mutual agreement
between the parties.
The provisions of this Article and the side letters referred to herein shall continue in full
force and effect for the tenn of this Agreement, any dates in those letters to the contrary
notwithstanding.

ARTICLE44
PHYSICAL FITNESS COMMITTEE
Section 1.
A Committee shall be established to develop a mutually acceptable program of
physical fitness for the members of the bargaining unit.
Section 2.
The Committee shall be comprised of not less than two nor more than four
representatives each from the Commonwealth and the Pennsylvania State Troopers Association.
Section 3.
The PSTA representatives shall be granted time off with pay (unless a present or
threatened emergency requires their services) as is reasonably necessary to complete the foregoing
(including travel time).
Section 4.
The PST A members of the Committee shall be provided with access to all
information and documents used or considered by the Commonwealth in evaluating the potential
physical fitness program and that is reasonably necessary to assist them in the performance of their
duties.

so

Section 5.
If after a good faith effort the Committee is unable to reach agreement upon the
terms of the physical fitness program, the Commonwealth shall be pennitted to formulate and
present the PSTA a complete physical fitness program that it intends to implement within the
bargaining unit. If the PSTA believes that such program is, in whole or in part, unreasonable, it
shall so advise the Commonwealth within 10 business days of its receipt and shall include within
such notice the reason or reasons for objection. If the Commonwealth so chooses, it may then seek
arbitration of the dispute as provided in Article 28.
Section 6.
ln the event that the Commonwealth should seek arbitration of the dispute
described in Section 5, the following rules shall apply:
a.

Unless extended in writing, the hearing shall be held within 45 calendar days from
the selection of the arbitrator,

b.

If either party desires to file briefs at the close of the hearing, they shall be filed in
one calendar week;

c.

The arbitrator's final and binding decision shall be rendered in 30 days from receipt
of the briefs;

d.

The arbitrator shall not substitute his/her judgment for the reasonable judgment of
the Commonwealth in the development of the physical fitness program.

Section 7.
The Commonwealth shall not implement, in whole or in part, a physical fitness
program unless and until that program is approved by the arbitrator under the procedures as
described in Section 6.
Section 8.
Any member injured as a result of fitness testing shall be deemed to have been
injured in the perfonnance of his or her duties and shall be eligible to receive benefits either
through the Heart & Lung Act and/or workers' compensation.

ARTICLE45
FAMILY CARE LEAVE
Section l.
After completing one year of service, members shall be granted, upon written
request, up to 12 weeks ofleave without pay in a calendar year for the purpose of attending to the
medical needs of a spouse, parent, child under age 18 or 18 years or older and incapable of selfcare because of mental or physical disability, or other person qualifying as a dependent under IRS
eligibility criteria.

51

Leave for this purpose may be taken one day at a time if necessary. Leave shall be
approved for less than one day at a time when medically necessary due to a serious health
condition as defined in the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993.
Documentation of the need for Family Care Leave shall be required.
Section 2.
State-paid coverage for medical benefits, supplemental health benefits, and Group
Life lnsurance as provided in Articles 16, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23 and 24 will continue for the period of
time the member is on family care leave under Section 1 of this Article.
Section 3.

The 12 week entitlement under Section I above may not be extended.

Section 4.
Members will not be required to use accumulated annual and/or personal leave
prior to taking family care leave without pay.
Section 5.
For the purpose of this Article, the calendar year shall be defined as beginning with
the member's first full pay period commencing on or after January 1 and continuing through the
end of the member's pay period that includes December 31.

ARTICLE46

LIMITEDDUTY
Section I.

Work-Related Limited Duty

All side letters regarding work-related limited duty dated prior to May I, 2013 are modified
as follows:
a.
Members currently or in the future who are on work-related limited duty shall be
limited to the lesser of: ( 1) the length of the illness/injury requiring limited duty or (2) completion
of twenty-five (25) years of creditable service.
b.
Where the member completes his/her twenty-fifth (25 th) year of creditable service
while on limited duty, the member shall be separated from employment.
c.
A member who is placed on limited duty after twenty-five (25) years of creditable
service, shall be removed from limited duty after the earlier of: ( 1) the length of the illness/injury
requiring limited duty or (2) one ( 1) year after which he/she shall be separated from employment.

52

Section 2.

Non-Work-Related Disabilities

Members placed into a permanent limited duty status shall not be guaranteed entitlement of
continuing limited duty beyond the date that they reach twenty-five (25) years of creditable
service.
ARTICLE47
EMPLOYEE AUTHORIZED PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS
Section 1.
The Employer agrees to deduct from the paycheck of members covered by this
Agreement voluntary contributions to the Pennsylvania State Troopers Association's Political
Action Committee. The Employer shall make such deductions only in accordance with the
written authorization of respective members which shall specify the amount, frequency and
duration of the deductions.
Section 2.
The Employer shall transmit the monies deducted in accordance with this Article
to the Pennsylvania State Troopers Association's Political Action Committee in accordance with
the procedures agreed to by the Employer and the Pennsylvania State Troopers Association.
Section 3.
The Commonwealth shall provide one payroll slot to the PSTA to be used for a
voluntary deduction for the Troopers Helping Troopers Foundation. The voluntary deduction
shall be made only in accordance with the written authorization of respective members which
shall specify the amount, frequency and duration of the deduction, as well as the member's
name, employee number, and work location. The Commonwealth's only obligation under this
Section will be to deduct the authorized amount from the regular bi-weekly salary and wages of
the members who have requested the deduction through written authorization and to
electronically transmit the aggregate amount, together with an itemized statement to PSTA's
designated account recipient for the Troopers Helping Troopers Foundation by the last day of the
succeeding month after such deductions are made. The Commonwealth shall not be required to
provide additional reports or other information either to the PSTA or the Troopers Helping
Troopers Foundation. The provisions of Section 5 of this Article shall apply to this payroll slot.
Section 4.
The Pennsylvania State Troopers Association shall reimburse the Employer for
the Employer's actual cost for the expenses incurred in administering this Article.
Section 5.
The Pennsylvania State Troopers Association shall indemnify and hold the
Commonwealth harmless against any and all claims, suits, orders, or judgments brought or
issued against the Employer as a result of the action taken or not taken by the Employer under
the provisions of this Article.

53

ARTICLE48
LEAVE DONATION PROGRAM
Section 1.
The Commonwealth will implement and administer a Leave Donation Program.
Members may donate annual and personal leave to a designated member in the member's
bargaining unit who has used all accrued and anticipated paid leave for the current leave calendar
year. The leave is to be used for the recipient's own catastrophic or severe injury or illness or for
the catastrophic or severe injury or illness of a family member. The leave also may be used as
bereavement leave if the member's family member dies and the member has no accrued or
anticipated sick leave available, subject to the limitations in Article 14, Section 3.
Section 2.

a.

Recipients
Recipients must be members in the bargaining unit.

b.
Family member is defined as a husband, wife, child, step-child, foster-child or
parent of the member or any other person qualifying as a dependent under IRS eligibility criteria.
c.
A catastrophic or severe illness or injury that poses a direct threat to life or to the
vital function of major bodily systems or organs, and would cause the member to take leave
without pay or terminate employment, must be documented on a Family and Medical Leave Act
Serious Health Condition Certification form. Donated leave may not be used for work-related
injuries or illnesses, minor illnesses, injuries, or impairments, sporadic, short-term recurrences of
chronic, non-life threatening conditions, short-term absences due to contagious diseases, or
short-term recurring medical or therapeutic treatments, except for conditions such as those listed
above.
d.
The absence due to the catastrophic or severe illness or injury of the member or a
family member must be for more than 20 workdays in the current leave calendar year. The 20workday absence may be accumulated on an intermittent basis if properly documented as related
to the same catastrophic or severe illness or injury. Annual, personal, sick (for member's own
serious health condition), sick family (for the serious health condition of a family member),
holiday, compensatory, or unpaid leave may be used during the accumulation period. A separate
accumulation period must be met for each catastrophic or severe illness or injury and for each
leave calendar year in which donated leave is used. Donated leave may not be applied to the
required 20-workday accumulation period.
e.

All accrued leave must be used as follows before any donation may be received:
(1)
For a member's own catastrophic or severe injury or illness, all accrued
annual, sick, personal, holiday, and compensatory leave and all anticipated annual
and sick leave for the current leave calendar year must be used.

S4

(2)
For the catastrophic or severe injury or illness of a family member, all
accrued annual, personal, holiday, and compensatory leave and all anticipated
annual leave for the current leave calendar year must be used. All five days of
sick family leave and any additional sick family leave for which the member is
eligible must be used.
f.
Up to 12 weeks of donated leave per leave calendar year may be received for all
conditions of the member and family members cumulatively, but donations may not be received
in more than two consecutive leave calendar years. Donated leave is added to the recipient's
sick leave balance on a biweekly basis. Recipients do not repay the donor for donated leave.
Leave usage is monitored closely to ensure that donated leave is used only for absences related to
the catastrophic or severe illness or injury. Upon exhaustion of the 12 week donated leave cap, a
member may request an additional donation of up to thirty (30) days which shall be allowed at
the discretion of the Commissioner and shall not be unreasonably denied. Members shall not be
required to exhaust personal days before being eligible to access the Leave Donation Program.
g.
The recipient's entitlement to leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act will
be reduced by donated leave that is used. Entitlements to sick leave without pay (for a member's
own illness) or family care leave without pay (for a family member's illness) will also be
reduced.
h.
Donated leave may be used on an intermittent basis. However, each absence may
be required to be medically documented as due to the same catastrophic or severe illness or
injury.
i.
A member is not eligible to receive donations of leave if, during the previous six
months, the member has been placed on a written leave restriction, or has received a written
reprimand or suspension related to attendance.

j.
Donated leave that remains unused once the member is released by the physician
for full-time work, when the family member's condition no longer requires the member's
absence, or at the end of the leave calendar year, must be returned to the donors in inverse order
of donation. However, if at the end of the year, the absence is expected to continue beyond the
greater of 20 workdays or the amount of annual and sick leave that could be earned and used in
the following leave calendar year, donated leave may be carried into the next year.
Section 3.

Donors

a.
A donor may voluntarily donate annual and personal leave to a member within the
donor's bargaining unit who meets the requirements of the Leave Donation Program. Donations
may be made to multiple members, as long as the minimum donation is made to each member.

55

b.
Donations must be made in increments of one day (8.0 hours), but not more than
five days can be donated to any one member in the same leave calendar year. The donor's
annual leave balance after donation cannot be less than the equivalent of five workdays of leave
(40.0 hours). Anticipated personal leave may not be donated.
c.
The donation is effected by the completion and submission of a Request to
Donate Leave to the Bureau of Human Resources. Leave is deducted from the donor's annual
and/or personal leave balance at the time of donation and transferred to the recipient in order by
the date and time the Request to Donate Leave form is received.
d.
Unused donations are returned to the donor if: the recipient or family member
recovers, dies, or separates before the donor's leave is used; or if the recipient does not use the
leave by the end of the leave calendar year, and is expected to either return to work within 20
workdays or to have sufficient anticipated leave available in the new year to cover the absence.
In accordance with Section l above, a member whose family member dies and who does not
have accrued or anticipated sick leave available, may use donated leave as bereavement leave,
subject to the limitations in Article 14, Section 3.
Section 4.
Agreement.

The provisions of this Article are not grievable under Article 28 of this

ARTICLE49
CIVILIANIZA TION
Section l.
Effective December 24, 2008 or at such appropriate time as determined by the
Employer, the Employer shall have the right to convert from enlisted to civilian the positions
listed in Section 2 and the functions listed in Section 3.
Section 2.

Positions to be civilianized are:

PCO Supervisors working in CDCs
Grants Acquisition and Administration Section Trooper
Grants Acquisition and Administration Section Supervisor
Webmaster
Management Information Unit and UCR Section Supervisor
Troop Communications Supervisor
Procurement and Supply Officer
The civilianization of these positions shall be done by attrition such that current enlisted
members holding these positions shall be replaced by civilians only when the enlisted member
leaves the position voluntarily or involuntarily.

56

Section 3.
In addition to the positions listed in Section 2, the Employer shall have the right to
civilianize the following functions by hiring formerly enlisted annuitants to perform such
functions under such tenns and conditions deemed appropriate by the Employer:
a.

Non-Criminal Aspects of Background Investigations. Annuitants shall be
permitted to perform all non-criminal aspects of background investigations (e.g.,
contacting references, family members, community members, acquaintances;
credit checks; and/or conducting employment history verifications checks; etc.).
Criminal aspects of background investigations, such as contacting other law
enforcement agencies and performing criminal history checks, shall continue to
be performed by enlisted personnel.

b.

Non-Criminal Physical Fingerprinting. Annuitants shall be pennitted to perform
the physical fingerprinting for all purposes, with the exception of criminal
suspects under arrest, who shall continue to be fingerprinted by enlisted
personnel.

Section 4.
To address future needs or issues regarding civilianization of current positions
within the bargaining unit, or functions performed by the bargaining unit, the Employer shall
notify the PSTA in writing of specific positions and/or functions that it deems appropriate or
desirable for civilianization. If agreement is not reached within 90 days, the Interest Arbitration
Panel shall hear and resolve the matter. The Employer shall have the option of withdrawing its
civilianization request after the Panel has rendered its decision.

ARTICLE 50
TOBACCO USE
Notwithstanding any existing regulation of tobacco use, members are prohibited from
using any form of tobacco, including smokeless tobacco, inside any Commonwealth owned
vehicle.

ARTICLE 51
HEALTH CARE SHOP AROUND
The Commonwealth shall have the right to competitively bid out and award any and all
contracts of health care programs for active members and those who retire under this Agreement,
provided that the resulting programs shall be substantially similar in benefits and cost to the
active bargaining unit members and those who retire under this Agreement when compared to
those programs in place as amended herein and giving due consideration to the circumstances at
the time. Prior to implementation, any changes must be agreed to by the parties or ordered by
the Interest Arbitration Panel, which shall upon request of either party conduct a hearing and

S7

issue a ruling within 45 days of notification by the Employer to the PST A of any proposed
change under this provision. The PSTA shall have 15 days from notification to review the
request and the Panel shall have 30 days to conduct a hearing and issue a ruling within the
aforementioned 45 day time frame.

ARTICLE 52
TERM OF AGREEMENT
This Agreement shall be effective as of July 1, 2012. The term of the collective bargaining
agreement shall be for five years commencing on July l, 2012 and terminating on June 30, 2017.
All terms set forth above shall be effective July 1, 2012, unless otherwise indicated.

58

Appendix A

COMMONWEAL TH OF PENNSYLVANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2012
PAY SCALE T\'PE SP

LONGEVITY
RANGE
HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

s

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

A

8

28.18
2,254.40
58,795

29.n
2,381.80
62,112

31.40
2,512.00
65,513

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
C

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

32.29
2,583.20
87,370

33.21
2,856.80

0

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
E·

SP02
CPRL
STEP
E

SP04
SRGNT
STEP
E

SP08
LIEUT
STEP
E

34.14

36.87

40.00

2,731.20
71,230

2,949.80

3,200.00

43.60
3,488.00

69,289

78,928

83,458

90,967

35.20
2,818.00
73,441

36.19
2,895.20
75,507

39.08
3,128.40
81,537

42.40

48.22
3,697.80

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

36.53
2,922.40
78,216

39.45
3,156.00

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

36.87

2,949.80
76,926

39,82
3,185.80
83,080

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

37.21
2,978.80
n,1135

40.19
3.215.20
83,852

F

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

37.55
3,004.00
78,344

G

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

37.90
3,032.00
711,075

H

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

A

B

C

0

E

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

• Ralas Imm Longevity Range I and
aboverelleClTrooper 1s1Class
pay differential.

82,308

88,463
42.80
3,424.00
89.298

<18.65
3,732.00
97,331

YEARS
OF
SVC

47.52
3,801.80
99,148

52.03 YEARS 1
4,182.40 lliROUGH
108,555
5

50.37
4,029.60
105,092

55.15
4,412.00
115,065

START
OF 6th

50,85
.C,068.00

55.67

4,453.60

108,093

116,150

START
OF 7th
YEAR

51.32
4,105.60
107,074

56.19
4,495.20
117,235

START
OFBlll

YEAR

47.09
3,787.20

90,132

98,249

43.80
3,468.00

47.52
3,801.80

51.80

58.71

4,144.00

4,536.80

START
OF 9th

90,987

99,148

108,078

118,320

YEAR

40.58

44.00

3,244.80

47.96
3,836.80
100,064

52.27
4,181.80
109,058

57.23
4,578.40
119,405

START
OF10111

84,624

3,520.00
91,802

40.93
3,274.40
85,396

44.40
3,552.00
92,636

48.40
3,872.00
100,982

52.75
4,220.00
110,058

57.75
4,620.00
120,490

START
OF11111

38.24
3,059.20
79,784

41.29
3,303.20
86,147

44.80
3,564.00
93,471

48,83
3,906.40
101,879

53.22
4,257.80
111,038

58.27
4,681.80
121,575

START
OF 12th
YEAR

39.35
3,148.00
82,100

41.88
3,332.80
86,919

45.20
3,816.00

53,70
4,2116.00
112,040

58.711
4,703.20
122,859

START
OF 13th

94,305

49.27
3,941.60
102,797

45.80
3,648.00
95,140

49.70
3,976.00
103,694

54.17
4,333.60
113,020

4,744.80

START
OF 14th

123,744

YEAR

48.00

50.14
4,011.20
104,612

54,65
4,372.00
114,022

59.83
4,786.40
124,829

START
OF15111

50.5a
4,046.40
105,530

55.12
4,409.60
115,002

4,828.00

START
OF 16th

98,809

125,914

YEAR

46,80
3,744.00
97,644

51.01
4,080.60
108,427

55.60
4,448.00

80,68

START
OF 17th

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

39.69
3,175.20
82,809

42.03
3,362.40
87,891

K

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL*

40.04
3,203.20
83,539

42.40
3,392.00

L

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

40.39
3,231.20
84.270

42.n
3,421.60
89.235

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

40.74
3,259.20
85,000

43.14

8B,483

3,451.20
90,007

43.20

96,433

SP09
MAJOR
STEP
E

3,458.00

J

M

3,3112.00

SP08
CPT
STEP
E

3,6BO.OO
95,974

48.40
3,712.00

116,004

59.31

60,35

4,870.40
127,020

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

Page 1 012

AppendbtA

COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2012
PAY SCALE TYPE SP

LONGEVITY
RANGE

SP01
moOPER
STEP

s

SPOI
TROOPER
STEP
A

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

B

C

D

SP01
TROOPER
SlEP
E•

SP02
CPRL
STEP
E

SP04
SRGNT
STEP
E

SPOO
LIEUT
STEP
E

SP08
CPT
STEP
E

43.51
3,480.80
90,779

47.20
3,776.00
98,478

51.45
4,116.00
107,345

4,485.80

47.60
3,808.00
99,313

4,150.4D

SP09
MAJOR
STEP
E

YEARS
OF
SVC

116,984

81.40
4,912.00
128,105

START
OF 18th
YEAR

108.242

56.55
4,524.00
117,986

81.92
4,953.60
129,190

START
OF191h
YEAR

52.32
4,185.60
109,160

57,02
4,581.80
118,987

82.44
4,995.20
130,275

START
OF 20th

57,50

3,872.00
100,982

52.76
4,22D.80
110,078

4,800.00

START
OF 21st

119,986

62.96
5,036.80
131,360

53,19
4,255.20
110,978

57.97
4,637.60
120,949

63.48
5,078.40
132,445

START
OF 22nd

N

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

41.09
3.287.20
115,730

41.44

0

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

43.88

3,315.20

86,480

3,510,40
91,551

p

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

41,76
3,342.40
87,170

44.24
3,539.20
92.302

Q

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

42.13
3,370.4D
87,900

44.61
3,566.8D
93.074

42.48

R

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

44.98

3,398,40
88,630

3,598.40
93,846

48.80
3,904.00
101,818

s

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

42.83
3,426.40
89,361

45,35
3,628.00
94,618

49.2D
3,938.00
102,651

53.63
4,290.40
111,894

58.45
4,676.00
121,950

64.00
5,120.00
133,530

START
OF 23rd

T

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

43,18
3,454.4D
90,091

45.72
3,657.80
95,390

49.80
3,988.00
103,4115

54.00
4,324.80
112,791

58.92
4,713.60
122,931

84.52
5,181.60
134,615

START
OF 24th

u

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

43.53
3,482.40
90,821

46.09
3,687.20
98,182

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

43.87
3,509.80
91,530

48.48

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

V

w

HOURLY
X
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•
• Annual rates Isled on lhls schedule 8111 appn1xlmale.

48.00
3,840.00
100,147

48.40

50.00

51.88

54.SO

56.07

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

4,360.00
113,709

59.40
4,752.00
123,932

65.04
5.203.20
135,699

START
OF 25th

104,320

3,716,80
98.934

50.40
4,032.00
105,155

54.94
4.395.20
114,827

59.88
4,790.40
124,934

85.56
5,244.80
136,784

START
OF 26th

44.22
3,537.60
92,281

48.82
3,745.80
97,885

50.80
4,084.00
105,989

55.37
4,429.60
115,524

60.35
4,828.00
125,914

66.08
5,288.40
137,869

START
OF 27th

44.57

47.19
3,775.20
98,457

51.20
4,096.00
106,824

55.81

4,484.80

60,83
4,866.40
126.916

66.80
5,328.00
138,954

START
OF2111h

3,565.80
92,991

4,000.00

116,442

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

Page2ol2

AppendixB (Table 1)
COMMONWEAllli OF PENNSYLVANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVEJULY 1, 2013
PAY SCALE TYPE SP
Membershlradpriorto 71112013

LONGEVITY
RANGE

~·

A

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

B

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

C

SPD1
SP01
SPD1
SP01
SPD1
SPOt
TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER
STEP
STEP
STEP
STEP
STEP
STEP
s
A
B
E·
C
D
28.74
2,299.20
59,983

30.37
2,429.60
83,384

32,03
2,582.40
66,827

SP04
SRGNT
STEP
E

SP06
LIEUT
STEP
E

SP08
CPT
STEP
E

SP09
M.A.JOR
STEP
E

YEARS
OF
SVC

33.87
2,709.80
70,888

34.82
2,785.80
72,848

37.81
3,008.80
78,470

40.81
3,284.80
85,148

44.48
3,558.40
92,803

48.48
3,878.40
101,149

53.09 YEARS!
4,247.20 THROUGH
110,787
5

35.90
2,872.00
74,902

38.91
2,952.80
77,009

39.87
3,189.80
83,185

43.28
3,460.80
90,258

47.15
3,772.00
98,374

51.39
4,111.20
107,220

58.28
4,502.40
117,423

START
OF 6th
YEAR

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

37.28
2,980.80
77,739

40.24
3,219.20
83,957

43.67
3,493.60
91,113

47.59
3,807.20
99,292

51.87
4,149.80
108,222

58.81
4,544.80
118,528

START
OF7lh

D

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

37.61
3,008.80
78,470

40.62
3,249.6D
84,750

44.07
3,525.60
91,948

48.04
3,843.20
100,231

52.38
4,188.80
109,244

57.34
4,587.20
119,634

START
OF81h

E

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

37.95
3,038.00
79,179

40.99
3,279.20
85,522

44.48
3,558.40
92,803

48.48
3,878.40
101,149

52.84
4,227.20
110.245

57.87
4,829.80
120,740

START
OF 9th

F

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

38.30
3,064.00
79,909

41.37
3,309.80
86,314

44.89
3,591.20

53.33
4,266.40
111,268

58.40
4,872.00
121,848

START
OF101h

93,858

48.93
3,914.40
102,088

G

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

33.85
3,092.00
80,639

41.75
3,340.00
87,107

45.30
3,624.00
94,514

49.37
3,949.80
103,006

53.81
4,304.80
112,289

58.93
4,714.40
122,952

START
OF 11th

H

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

39.00
3,120.00
81,370

42.12
3,369.80
87,879

45.71
3,858.BD
95,369

49.82
3,985.80
103,944

54.30
4,344.00
113.292

59.48
4,758.80
124,057

START
OF 12th
YEAR

40.14
3,211.20
83,748

42.50
3,400.00
88,672

46.12
3,689.60
96,225

50.26
4,020.80
104,862

54.78
4,382.40
114,293

59.99
4,799.20
125,163

START
OF 13th

START
OF 14th

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

32.94
2,835.20
88,728

SP02
CPRL
STEP
E

• Ra1esfTomLongelrily Range I and
above n,ftec:tTrooper 1st Class
pay diffen,ntial.

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

J

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

40.49
3,239.20
84,478

42.88
3,430.40
69,465

46.52
3,721.80
97,059

50.71
4,058.80
105,601

55.27
4,421.60
115,315

80.52
4,841.60
126,269

K

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL'

40.85
3,288.00
85.229

43.25
3,480.00
90.237

46.93
3,754.40
97,815

51.15
4,092.00
106,718

55.75
4,480.00
118,317

61.05 START
4,11114.00 OF15th
127,375 YEAR

L

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

41.20
3,296.00

43.63
3,490.40
91,030

47.34
3,787.20
93,770

51.BD
4,128.00
107,858

56.24
4,499.20
117,339

61.58
4,926.40
128,481

START
OF 16th

85,960

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

41.58
3,324.80
88.711

44.00
3,520.00
91,802

47.75
3,820.00
99,828

52.04
4,183.20
108,576

56.72
4,537.80
118,341

82.12
4,969.80
129,607

START
OF 171h

M

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

Page 1012

Appendix B {Table 1)

COMMONWEAL TH OF PENNSYLVANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2013
PAY SCALE l'l'PE SP
Members llired prior lo 71112013

LONGEVITY
RANGE

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

s

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

A

B

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
C

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

0

SPOI
TROOPER
STEP
E"

SPD2
CPRL
STEP
E

SPCM
SRGNT
STEP
E

SP06
LIEUT
STEP
E

SP08

CPT
STEP

E

SP09
MAJOR
STEP
E

YEARS
OF

SVC

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

41.91

44.38

52.49
4,199.20

62.65

3,550.40

48.16
3,852.80

57.21

3,352.80

4,578.80

87,441

92,594

100,481

109,515

119,363

5,012.00
130,713

0

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

42.27
3,381.60
88,192

44.76
3,580.80
93,387

48.58
3,864.80
101,316

52.93
4,234.40
110,433

57.69
4,615.20
120,364

63.18
5,054.40
131,819

START
OF 19111

p

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

42.62
3,409.60
88,922

45.13
3,810.40
94,159

48.97
3,917.60
102,171

53.38
4,270.40
111,372

58.18
4,654.40
121,387

63.71
5,098.80
132,925

START
OF20111

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

42.98
3,438.40
89,673

45.51
3,640.80
94,952

49.38
3,950.40
103,0211

5:uz
4,305.60
112,290

58.66

4,692.80

START
OF 21st

122,Jaa

64.24
5,139.20
134,030

R

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

43.33
3,486.40

49.79
3,983.20
103,882

54.27
4,341.60
113,229

59.15
4,732.00
123,411

114.77
5,181.60
135,138

START
OF 22nd

90,404

45.88
3,670.40
95,724

s

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

44.11
3,528.80
92,031

46.26
3,700.80
98,517

50.20
4,018.00
104,737

54.71
4,378.80
114,147

59.63
4,770.40
124,412

65.30
5,224.00
138,242

START
OF 23rd

44.47

48.64

50,60

T

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

3,557.80
92,782

3,731.20
97,310

4,048.00

55.18
4.412.80
115,088

80.12
4,809.80
125,434

65.83
5,266.40
137,348

START
OF24111
YEAR

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

44.83
3,588.40
93,533

47.01
3,760.80
98,082

51.01
4,080.80
106,427

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

45.18
3,814.40
94,284

47.39
3,791.20
98,874

51.42
4,113.60
107,2113

4,483.20
116,922

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

47.76
3,820.80
99,648

51.83
4,148.40
108,138

56.49

61.57

3,643.20
95,015

4,519.20
117,861

4,925.60

45.90
3,672.00
95,766

48.14
3,851.20
100,439

52.24
4,179.20
103,994

N

Q

u

V

w

• Rales llom Longevity Range S and
above rellecl Master Trvoper
pay differenllal

HOURLY
X
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•
• Annual 111tesIsled on lhls schedule are appn,ximate.

45.54

105,572

4,448.00

BO.BO
4,648.00

116,004

126,436

55.60

56.CM

66.38
5,308.80
138,454

61.03

66.89

4,888.40

5,351.20
139,559

127,437

128,460

117.42
5,393.60
140,6115

58.93

82.05

87.98

4,554.40

4,964.00

5,438.80

118,779

129,481

141,7112

START
OF 18111
YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

START
OF 25111

YEAR
START
OF 28111

YEAR
START
OF 27111

YEAR
START
OF 28111

YEAR

Page 2012

Appendix B (Table 2)

COMMONWEAL TH OF PENNSYLVANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2013
PAY SCALE TYPE SP
Members hired onor after711/2013

LONGEVITY
RANGE

A

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

s

26.12
2,069.60
54,497

$POI
TROOPER
STEP

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

A

8

27.86
2,228.BO
58,127

29.60
2,368.00
61,757

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
C

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
D

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
E"

31.:W
2,507.20

33.08
2,846.40
69,018

:W.82
2,785,BO
72,848

37.61
3,008.80
78,470

3,284.80

35.06
2,804.80
73,149

38.91
2,952.80
77,009

39.87
3,189.60
83,185

3,460.80

65,388

SP02
CPRL
STEP
E

SP04
SRGNT
STEP

E
40,81

SPOIi
LIEUT
STEP
E

«.48

SP08
CPT
STEP

SP09
MAJOR
STEP

E

E

48.48

3,558.40
92,803

3,878.40
101,149

90,258

47.15
3,772.00
98,374

4,111.20
107,220

85,146

53.09

YEARS
OF
SVC
YEARS 1

4,2◄7.20 THROUGH

110,767

5

B

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

C

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

37,26
2,980.BO
77,739

3,219.20
83,957

43.67
3,493.60
91,113

47,59
3,807.20
99,292

108,222

118,528

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

37,61
3,008.BO
78,470

40.62
3,249.60
84,750

«.07
3,525.60
91,948

48.04

52.36

3,843.20
100,231

4,188.80

57.:W
4,587.20
119,634

E

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

37.9S
3,038.00
79,179

40.99

48.48

3,279.20
8S,522

3,558.40
92,803

3,878.40
101,149

52.84
4.227.20
110,245

4,629.60

START
OF9111

120,740

YEAR

F

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

38,30
3,064.00
79,909

41.37
3,309.60
88,314

«.89
3,591.20

48,93
3,914.40
102,088

53.33
4,266.40
111.268

56.40
4,872.00
121,846

START
OF 10111

G

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

38.65
3,092.00
80,639

41.75
3,:W0.00
87,107

49.37
3,9411.60
103,006

53.81

3,624.00
94,514

4,304.BO

58.93
4,714.40
122,952

START
OF 11111

H

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

39.00
3,120,00
81,370

42.12
3,389.60
87,879

45.71
3,656.80
95,389

49.82
3,985.60

4,344.00
113,292

59.46
4,758.80
124,057

START
OF 12111

103,944

40,14
3,211.20
83,748

42.50
3,◄00.00

88,872

46.12
3,689.60
96,225

50,26
4,020.80
104,862

54.78
4,382.40
114,293

4,799.20
125,163

50.71
4,058.80
105,801

55.27
4,421.60
115,315

60.52
4,841.60
128,269

D

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

• Rates from Longe'olit\l Range I and
above 111llectTrooper 1st Class
pay dllerential.

40.24

43.26

«.48

93,658
45.30

51.39

56.28
4,502.40
117,423

START
OF 6111
YEAR

51.87

56,81

4,149.60

4,5◄4.80

START
Of 7111
YEAR

109,2«

112.269

54.30

57.87

59.99

START
OF 8111

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR
START
OF 131h

YEAR

J

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

40.49
3,239.20
64,478

42.88
3,430.40
89,465

46.52
3,721.60
97,059

40.85
3,268.00
85,229

43.25
3,460.00
90,237

48.93

K

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

51.15

55.75

81.05

3,754.◄0

◄,092.00

4,◄60.00

◄,884,00

START
OF15111

97.915

108,719

118,317

127,375

YEAR

L

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

41.20
3,296.00
85,960

3,490.◄0

47.34
3,787.20
98,770

51.60
4,128.00
107,858

58.24
4,499.20
117,339

81.58
4,928.40
128,481

START
OF 16111

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

41.56
3,324.80
86,711

«.oo
3,520.00
91,802

◄7.75

52.04
4,163.20
108,576

58.72
4,537.60
118,341

62.12
4,989.60
129,607

M

43.63
91,030

3,820.00
99,826

START
OF141h

YEAR

YEAR
START

OF 17th
YEAR

Page 1 012

Appendix B (Table 2)

COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2013
PAY SCALE TYPE SP
Memben; hired on or an.er7/1/2013

LONGEVITY
RANGE

~

SP01
SPOI
SP01
SP01
SPOI
SPOI
TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER
STEP
STEP
STEP
STEP
STEP
STEP
s
A
B
C
D
e·

SP02
CPRL
STEP
E

SP04
SRGNT
STEP
E

SP06
LIEUT
STEP
E

STEP
E

SP09
WJOR
STEP
E

SP08

CPT

YEARS
OF
SVC

N

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

3,352.80
87,441

44.38
3,550.40
92,594

48.16
3,852.110
100,481

52.49
4,199.20
109,515

57.21
4,578.80
119,383

62.65
5,012.00
130,713

START
OF 18111

0

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

42.27
3,381.60
88,192

44.76
3,580.80
93,387

48.56
3,884.80
101,318

52.93
4,234.40
110,433

57.69
◄.615.20

120,364

83.18
5,054.40
131,819

START
OF 19th
YEAR

p

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

◄2.62

3,409.60
88,922

45.13
3,810.40
94,159

48.97
3,917.60
102,171

53.38
4,270.40
111,372

58.18
4,854.40
121,387

63.71
5,096.80
132,925

START
OF 20111

a

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

42.98
3.438.40
89,673

45.51
3,840.80
94,952

49.38
3,950.40
103,026

53,82
4,305.60
112.290

58.68
4,692,8D
122,388

64.24
5,139.20
134,030

START
OF 21st

R

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

43.33
3,468.40
90,404

45.88
3,670.40
95,724

49.79
3,983.20
103,882

54.27
4,341.60
113.229

59,15
4,732.00
123.411

64.n
5,181.60
135,136

START
OF 22nd
YEAR

s

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

44.11
3,528.80
92,031

46.26
3,700.80
98,517

50.20
4,018.00
104,737

54,71
4,376.80
114,147

59.83
4,no.4o
124,412

65.30
5.224.00
138,242

START
OF 23rd
YEAR

T

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

44.47
3,557.80
92,782

48.84
3,731.20
97,310

50.60
4,048.00
105,572

55.18
4,412.60
115,088

80.12
4,809.60
125,434

65.83
5,266.40
137,348

START
OF 24111
YEAR

u

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

44.83
3,588.40
93,533

47.D1
3,760.80
98,082

51.01
4,080.80
106,427

55.80
4,448.00
116,004

60.60
4,848,00
126.436

68.38
5,308.80
138,454

START
OF 25th

V

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

45,18
3,614.40
94,284

47.39
3,791.20
98,874

51.42
4,113.60
107,283

4,483.20
116,922

61.08
4,886.40
127.437

66.89
5,351.20
139,559

START
OF261h
YEAR

w

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

45.54
3,643.20
95,015

47.76
3,820.80
99,846

51.83
4,148.40
108,138

56.49
4,519.20
117,861

61.57
4,925.60
128,460

87.42
5,393.60
140,685

START
OF 27111

45,90
3,872.00
95,788

48.14
3,851.20
100,439

52.24
4,178.20
108.994

58,93
4,554.40
118,nD

82.05
4,964.00
129.461

67.96
5,438.80
141,792

START
OF 28th
YEAR

◄ 1.91

• Rates llllm Longevity Range S and
above111llect
Master Trooper
pay differential

HOURLY
X
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"
• Annual rates isled on 1111s
schedule are approximate.

58,04

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

Page2 of2

Appendix C (Table 1)

COMMONWEAL Tli OF PENNSYLVANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2014
PAY SCALE TWE SP
Members hired pt1orto 711/2013

LONGEVITY
RANGE

A

B

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

s
29.46
2,358.80
61,-465

SPOI
TROOPER
STEP

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
B

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
C

31.13

32.83

2,490.-40
64,950

2,626.-40
68,497

33.76
2,700.80
70,437

A

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

0
3-4.72
2,777.80
72,«0

36.80
2,944.00

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
E·
35.69
2,855.20

74,464
37.83

SP02
CPRL
STEP
E
38.55

3,084.00
80,431
-40.86

3,026.40
78,929

3,268.80

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL*

38.19
3,055.20
79,680

41.25
3,300.00

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL*

38.55

SP04
SRGNT
STEP
E

SP06
LIEUT
STEP
E

41,83
3,3-46.40

45.59

49.69

3,647.20

87,27-4

95,119

3,975.20
103,673

54.41 VEARS 1
4,352.80 THROUGH
113,521
5

52.67
4,213.60
109,891

57.67
4,613,60
120,323

START
OF 6th

53.17
4,253.60
110,93-4

58.22

4,657.60

START
OF71h
VEAR

53.67
4,293.60
111,977

58.76
-4,700.80
122,597

«.34

48.33

SP08
CPT
STEP
E

SP09
MAJOR
STEP
E

YEARS
OF
SVC

3,547.20
92,511

3,866.40

48.78

86,064

«.76
3,580.80
93,387

41.83
3,330.40

45.18

49.24

3,084.00

3,614.40

80,431

88,857

94,264

3,939.20
102,734

E

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

38,90
3,112.00
81,161

42.02

45.59

49.69

3,361.80
87,671

3,647.20
95,119

3,975.20
103,673

54.16
4,332.80
112,999

39.26
3,140.80
81,912

46.01

F

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

50.15
4,012.00
104,633

39,62
3,169.80

50.60
4,048.00

55.18

G

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

60.40

4,412.80

105,572

115,086

4,832.00
126,019

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL*

39.97
3,197.60
83,393

51.06

55.65

4,084.80

4,-452.00

80.94
4,875.20

106,532

116,108

127,145

START
OF121h
YEAR

51.52
4,121.80
107,491

56.15

4,492.00

81.48
4,918.40

START
OF131h

117,151

128,272

YEAR

C

0

8:

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

H

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

76,780

82,1163

• Rates ln>m Longevity Range I and
abovereflectTrooper1st Class

pay differential.

41.13
3,290.40

85,814

85,250

-42.41
3,392.80

88,-484
-42.79

3,680.80

95,995
46.43

3,423.20
89,277

3,714.40
96,872

43.18

48.85
3,748.00
97,748

3,-454,40
90,091

43.56
3,484.80
90,884

47.27
3,781.60

47.69
3,815.20

98,624

100,836

3,902.-40
101,775

J

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL*

3,320.00

86,586

43.95
3,518.00
91,697

K

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

41.86
3,348.80
87,337

44.33
3,546.-40
92,490

3,848.00

52.43
4,194.40

100,356

L

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

-42.22
3,377.60

88,088

44.72
3,577.60
93,304

48.52
3,881.60
101,232

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL*

42.59
3,407.20
88,860

45.10
3,808.00
94,097

48,94

M

41.50

99,500
-48.10

3,915.20
102,108

121,470

511.31

YEAR

START
Of 8111

YEAR

4,744.80

START
OF91h

123,744

YEAR

54.66

59.85

4,372.60
114,043

4,788.00
124,871

START
OF10lh
VEAR
START
OF 11111

YEAR

56.85

82.03

4,532.00
118,195

4,962.40

START
OF 14th

129,419

YEAR

62.57
5,005.60
130,548

START
OF 15th

109,390

57.1-4
4,571.20
119.217

52.88
4.230.40
110,329

57.64
4,811.20
120,260

63,12
5,049.60
131,694

START
OF 16th

53.3-4
4,267.20
111,289

58.14
4,651.20
121,303

63.66
5,092.80
132,820

START
OF 17th

51.97
4,157.60
108,430

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

Page 1 ol 2

Appendix C (Table 1)

COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY I, 2014
PAY SCALE TYPE SP
Members hired prior to 711/2013

lONGEl/llY
RANGE

SPD1
TROOPER
STEP

s

SPOI
TROOPER
STEP

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

A

B

SPOI
TROOPER
STEP
C

SPOI
TROOPER
STEP

D

HOURLY

N

p

0

R

CPT
STEP
E

45.49
3,639.20
94,910

49.36
3,948.80
102,985

53.80
4,304.00
112,248

3,465.60

45.87
3,669.60

49.78
3,982.40

54.25
4,340.00

4,730.40

114.75
5,180.00

START
OF 19111

90,383

95,703

103,661

113,187

123,369

135,094

YEAR

43.116
3,494.40

46.26

50.20
4,016,00

54.71
4,376.80

59.63

4,TT0.40

START
OF201h

104,737

114,147

124,412

65.29
5,223.20
136,221

50.61
4,048.SO

55.16

60.12

65,84

4,412.80

4,809.60

START
OF2111

105,593

1\5,086

125,434

5,287.20
137,369

43.32

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL'

SP08

SP04
SRGNT
STEP

89,611

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL'

SP06
LIEUT
STEP

SP02
CPRL
STEP
E

42.95
3,436.00

BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL'

0

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
E·

91,134

3,700.80
96,517

e

E

58.63
4,690.40
122,326
59.13

44.04

46.65

3,523.20
91,885

3,732.00
97,331

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

44.41

47.03
3,762.40
98,123

51.03

55.62

60.62

66.38

3,552.80
92,657

4,082.40

4,449.60

4,849.60

106,469

116,046

126,478

5,310.40
138,495

45.21
3,816.80
94,328

47.42
3,793.60
98,937

51.45
4,116.00
107,345

56.03
4,488.40

4,889.60

117,005

127,521

47.80
3,82<4.00
99,730

51.87

58.53

81,62

4,149.60

4,522.40

4,929.60

108,222

117,944

128,584

52.29
4,163.20
109,098

58.99
4,559.20

52.71

57.44
4,595.20
119,843

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL'

T

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL'

45.58
3,848.40
95,098

u

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL'

45,95

48.19

3,878.00
95,870

3,855.20
100,544

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL'

46.32
3,705.60
96,642

48.57
3,885.60
101,336

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL'

48.69

48.98

53.12

3,735.20
97,414

3,916.80
102,150

4,249.60

57.90
4,632.00

110,830

120,803

47.05
3,764.00
98,165

49.34
3,947.20
102,943

53.54
4,283.20
111,706

4,668.80

63.80
5,088.00

121,762

132,895

w

• Rates hom longevity Range S and
aboveRifted Masler Trooper
pay differential

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL'
• Annual rates listedon lhl$ scheduleare appnixlmale,

X

84.20
5,136.00
133,947

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL'

s

V

SP09
MAJOR
STEP
E

4,216.80
109,974

118,904

58.36

81.12

YEARS
OF
SVC
START
OF 181h

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR
START
OF 22nd

YEAR

116.92
5,353.60
139,622

START
OF23rd

87.47
5,397.60
140,769

START
OF24111
YEAR

68.01
5,440.80
141,896

START
OF 25lh

5,008.80

68.58
5,484.80

START
OF26lh

130,630

143,044

YEAR

113.11
5,048.80
131,673

89.10

5,528.00

START
OF 27lh

144,170

YEAR

69.64

START
OF 28th

62.11

4,968.60
129,586
62.61

5,571.20
145.297

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

Page2of2

Appendix C (Table2)

COMMONWEAL TH OF PENNSYLVANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY I, 2014
PAY SCALE TYPE SP
Membe,s hired on o, alter7/1/2D13

LONGEVITY
RANGE

A

m

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

SPOI
TROOPER
STEP

s

26.77
2,141.80
55,853

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
A

SPOI
TROOPER
STEP

28.55
2.284.00
59,587

30.34
2,427.20
63,301

B

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
C

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
D

SPOI
TROOPER
STEP

SP02
CPRL
STEP
E

SP04
SRGNT
STEP
E

32.12
2,569.80
67,015

33.91
2,712.80
70,750

35.69
2,855.20

41.83

45.59

49.89

74,484

38.55
3,084.00
80,431

3,348.4D
87,274

3,847.20
95,119

3,975.20
103,673

54.41 YEARS 1
4,352.8D THROUGH
113,521
5

35.94
2,875.20
74,985

37.83
3,028.40
78,929

40.86

44.34

3,268.80
85,250

3,547.20
92,511

48.33
3,866.40
100,836

52.67
4,213.60
109,891

57.67
4,813.60
120,323

START
OF61h
YEAR

44.78
3,580.80
93,387

48,78
3,902.40
101,775

53.17
4,253.60
110,934

58.22
4,857.60
121,470

START
OF 7111

START
OFBIII
YEAR

e·

SP06
LIEUT
STEP
E

SP08
CPT
STEP
E

SP09
MAJOR
STEP
E

B

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

C

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

38.19
3,055.20
79,680

41.25
3,300.00

D

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

38.55
3,084.00
80,431

41.83
3,330.40
86,857

45.18
3,814.-40
9-4,284

3,939.2D
102,734

53.87
4,293.60
111,977

58.78
4,700.80
122,597

E

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

38,90
3,112.00
81,161

42.02
3,361.80
87,671

45.59
3,647.20
95,119

49.89
3.975.20
103,673

54.16
4,332.80
112,999

4,744.80

F

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

39.28
3,140.80
81,912

42.41
3,392.80

46.01
3,680.80
95,995

50.15
4,012.00
104,633

54.66
4,372.80
114,043

4,788.00

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL'

39,62
3,169.60
82,883

42.79
3,423.20
89,277

48.43

50.80

55.16

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

39.97
3,197.60
83,393

43.18

46.85

51.06

3,454.40

4,084.80

90,091

3,748.00
97,748

106,532

118,108

43.58
3,484.80
90,884

47.27
3,781.80
98,624

51.52
4,121.80
107,491

4,492.00

43.95
3,516.00
91,897

47.89
3,815.20
99,500

51.97
4,157.80
108,430

56.65
4,532.00
118,195

4,98UO

5,005.60

""
G

H

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL'

J

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

K

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

L

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL'

M

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

• Rales from Longe\lily Range I and
above rallect Trooper 1st Class
pay dlffllfllnlial.

41.13
3,290.40

85,814
41.50
3,320.00

88,586

88,084

88,484

49.24

55.65

80.9"
4,675.20
127,145

START
OF 12111

96,872

105,572

115,088

56.15
117,151

44.33

48.10

52.43

3,848.00

4,194.40

92,490

100,356

109,390

57.14
4,571.2D
119.217

42.22
3,377.60

44.72

48.52

3,577.60
93,304

3,881.80
101,232

52,88
4,230.40
110,329

57.64
4,811.20
120,260

45.10
3,608.00
94,097

3,915.20
102,108

53.34
4,267.20
111,289

4,851.2D
121,303

48.94

124,871

START
OF 10111
YEAR

4,452.00

4,412.80

3,546.40

42.59

59.85

START
OF9111
YEAR

START
OF 11111

'4,048.00

41.88

3,407.20
88,860

123,744

YEAR

60.40
4,832.00
128,019

3,71-4.40

3,348.80
87,337

88,088

59.31

YEARS
OF
SVC

58.14

YEAR

YEAR

81.48
4,918.40
128,272

START
OF 13111

82,03

START
OF 14111

129,419
82.57
130,548
83.12

5,049.80

YEAR

YEAR
START
OF 151h

YEAR
START
OF 18111

131,694

YEAR

83.86
5,092.80
132,820

START
OF17111

YEAR

Page 1 of2

Appendbt C (Table 2)

COMMONWEALTHOF PENNSYLVANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2014
PAY SCALE TYPE SP
Membefshlred on oraller7/l/2013

LONGEVITY
RANGE

SP<M
SRGNT
STEP
E

SP06
LIEUT
STEP
E

SP08
CPT
STEP

SP09
MAJOR
STEP
E

YEARS
OF
SVC

e

N

42.95
3,438.00
89,611

45.49
3,839.20
94,910

49.36
3,948.80
102,985

53.80
4,30-4.00
112,248

58.83
4,690.40
122.326

84.20
5,136.00
133,947

START
OF 18111
YEAR

0

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

43.32
3,465.60
90,383

45.87
3,689.60
95,703

49.78
3,982.40
103,861

54.25
4,340.00
113,187

59.13
4,730.40
123,369

84.75
5,180.00
135,094

START
OF191h

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

43.68
3,494.40
91,134

46.26
3,700.80
96,517

50.20
4,016.00
104,737

54.71
4,376.80
114,147

59.83
4,770.40
124,412

65.29
5,223.20
138,221

START
OF 201h

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

44.04
3,523.20
91,885

48.85
3,732.00
97,331

50.61
4,048.80
105,593

55.18
4,412.80
115,088

60.12
4,809.60

65.64
5,287.20
137,369

START
OF 2111

R

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

44.41
3,552.80
92,657

47,0J
3,762.40
98,123

51.03
4,082.40
106,469

55.62
4,449.80
116,048

4,8◄9.60

START
OF 22nd

126,478

66.38
5,310.40
138,495

s

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

45.21
3,616.80
94,328

47.42
3,793.60
98,937

51.45
4,118.00
107,345

56.08
4,486.40
117,005

61.12
4,889.80
127,521

68.92
5,353.80
139,822

START
OF 23rd

45.58
3,846.40
95,098

47.80
3,824.00
99,730

51.87

T

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

61.82
4,929.80
128,584

67.47
5,397.60
140,769

START
OF 24111

108.222

58.53
4,522.40
117,944

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

45.95
3,676.00
95,870

52.29
4,183.2D
109,098

56.99

62.11

3,855.20
100,544

4,559.20
118,904

◄,968.80

68.01
5,440.80

129,586

1◄1,896

START
OF 25111
YEAR

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

48.32
3,705.60
96,842

48.57
3,885.60
101,336

52.71
4,216.80
109,974

57.44
4,595.20
119,843

82.61
5,008.80
130,630

5,48◄.8D

143,044

YEAR

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

48.69
3,735.20
97,414

48.96
3,918.80
102,150

53.12
4,249.60
110,830

57.90
4,832.00
120,803

63.11
5,048.80
131,673

69.10
5,528.00
144,170

START
OF 271h

47.05
3,764.00
98,165

49.34
3,947.20
102,943

58.38
4,668.80
121,762

83,80
5,088.00
132,695

69.84
5,57I,2D

START
OF 28111

Q

c»

e·

SP02
CPRL
STEP
E

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

p

a,,

$POI
$POI
SP01
SPOI
SPOI
SP01
TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER
STEP
STEP
STEP
STEP
STEP
STEP
s
A
B
C
D

u
V

w

• RalH ham Longevily Range S and
above reflect MasterTrooper
pay dlft"eranlial

HOURLY
X
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•
• Annual rales Isled on 1hisIICheduleant approldmate.

48.19

4,1◄9.60

53.54
4,283.20
111,706

125,◄34

60.62

68.56

1◄5,297

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

START
OF 26111

YEAR

YEAR

Page2 012

Appendix D {Table 1)

COMMONWEAI.Tli OF PENNSYLVANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2015
PAY SCALE TYPE SP
Members hired prior IO711/2013
SP01
TROOPER
STEP

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

SPOI
TROOPER
STEP

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
C

SP04
SRGNT
STEP
E

SP06
LIEUT
STEP
E

42.87
3,429.60
89,444

46.73
3,738.40
97,497

50.94
4,075.20

82,434
41.88
3,350.40
87,378

45.44
3,635.20
94,806

49.53
3,962.40

54.00
4,320.00

4,730.40

START
OF61h

103,339

112,666

123,369

YEAR

42.28
3,382.40

45.87
3,669.80

50.00
4,000.00

54.51

3,131.20

4,360.80

START
Of 7111

81,662

88.213

95,703

104,320

113,730

59.68
4,774.40
124,516

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

39.51
3,160.80

42.67

46.30

50.47

55,02

3,413.80

60.24
4,819.20

START
Of 8th

89,027

4,037.60
105,301

4,401.60

82,434

3,704.00
96,800

114,794

125,665

YEAR

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

39.87
3,189.80
83,185

46.73
3,738.40
97,497

50.94

55.52

3,445.60
89,861

4,075.20
106,281

4,441.60

60,80
4,864.00

START
OF91h

115,837

126,853

YEAR

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

3,219.20
83,957

43.46
3,476.80
80,675

47.16
3,772.80
98,395

51.40
4,112.00

56.03

F

4,482.40

81.36
4,908.80

107,241

118,901

128,022

40.80
3,248.00
84,708

43.86
3,508,8D
91,510

47.59

51.87

56.54

61.92

G

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

3,807.20

4,149.60
108,222

4,523.20
117,965

4,953.60

99,292

129,190

YEAR

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL'

40.97

48.01
3,840.80

52.34

57,05

3,277.80

44.25
3,540.00

4,187.20

4,584.00

62.47
4.987.60

START
OF 12111

85,480

92,323

100,168

109,202

119,029

130,337

YEAR

42.16
3,372.80
87,863

44.65

48.44

52.80

57.56

3,572.00
93,158

3,875.20
101,065

4,224.00

4,604.80

110,162

120,093

63.03
5,042.40
131,506

START
OF 13111
YEAR

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

42.53
3,402.40
68,735

45.04

48.87

3,603.20
93,971

3,909.80
101,962

53.27
4,261.80
111,143

4,645.60

63.59
5,087.20
132,674

START
OF 14111

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

42.91
3,432.80
89.527

45.44

K

3,835.20

49.30
3,944.00

4,666.40

102,860

122.221

B-4.15
5,132.00
133,843

START
OF 15111

94,806

53.74
4,299.20
112,123

43.28

L

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

3,482.40
90,299

45.B3
3,668.40
95,620

49.73
3,978.40
103,757

54.21
4,336.80
113,104

59.09
4,727.20
123.285

64.70
5,176.00
134,990

START
OF 16111

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

43,65
3,492.00
91,071

46.23
3,898.40
96,454

50.18
4,012.80
104,654

54.67
4,373.60
114,063

59.60
4,768.00
124,349

65.26
5,220.80
138,158

START
OF 17111

LONGEVITY
RANGE
HOURLY

A

BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

B

C

D

E

H

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

M

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
E"

38.58
2,926.40

3,160.80

78,321

3,018.40

38.77
3,101.60

76,720

80,890

A

B

30.20

31.91

33.65

34.60

35.59

2,418.00
83,009

2,552.80

2,692.00

2,768.00

88,577

70,207

72,189

2,847.20
74,255
37.73

39.14

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

J

s

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
D

40.24

• Rales ll'OmLongevity RangeI and
above renect Trooper 1S1Class
pay dillerenllal.

SP02
CPRL
STEP
E

39.51

43.07

SP08
CPT

STEP
E

106,281

58.07
121,157

58.58

SP09
MAJOR
STEP
E

YEARS
OF
SVC

55.78 YEARSI
4,482.40 lliROUGH
116,379
5
59.13

YEAR

START
OF 10111
YEAR
START
OF 11111

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

Page 1 of 2

Appendix D {Table 1)

COMMONWEAI.Ttt OF PENNSYLVANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY 1,2015
PAY SCALE TYPE SP
Members llinld pnorto 7/112013

LONGEVITY
RANGE

SPOI
TROOPER
STEP

s

SPOI
TROOPER
STEP

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

A

B

SPOI
TROOPER
STEP
C

SPOI
TROOPER
STEP
D

SPOI
TROOPER
STEP
E·

SP02
CPRL
STEP
E

SP04
SRGNT
STEP
E

SP06
LIEUT
STEP

46.62
3,729.80
97,288

50.59
4,047.20
105,551

55.14
4,411.20
115,04-4

E

SPOS
CPT
STEP
E

SP09
MAJOR
STEP
E

YEARS
OF
SVC

60.11
4,808.80
125,414

65,82
5,265.60
137,327

START
OF 18th
YEAR
START
OF19tl
YEAR

N

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

«.03
3,522.40
91,864

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

55.61

60.62

66.38

3,552.00
92,636

47.02
3,781,80
98,103

51.02

0

4,081,60

4,448,80

4,849.60

5,310.40

106,448

116,025

126,478

138,495

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

«.77
3,581.60
93,408

-47.41
3,792.80
98,916

51.-44
4,115.20
107,324

56.08

4,486.-40
117,005

81.13
4,890.40
127,542

5,355.20
13!1,664

Q

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

-45.15
3,612.00
94,201

47.81
3,824.80
99,751

51.87
4,149.60
108,222

56.54
4,523.20
117,965

61.64
4,931.20
128.606

67.49
5,399.20
140,811

START
OF 2111
YEAR

R

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

45.52
3,641.60
94,973

48.20
3,856.00
100,564

52.30
4,184.00
109,119

57.01
4,560.80
118,948

82.15
4,972.00
129,670

88.05
5,444.00
141,980

START
OF 22nd
YEAR

s

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

<CB.JS
3,708.00
96,705

48.60
3,888.00
101,3119

52.73
4,218.40
110,018

57.48
4,598.40
119,928

62.66
5,012.80
130,734

66.61
5,488.80
143,148

START
OF23nl

46.n
3,737.60
97,477

3,919.20
102,213

53.16
4,252.80
110,913

57.95

T

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

4,636.00

69.17
5,533.60
14-4,318

START
OF 24111

120,907

63.17
5,053.60
131,798

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

47.10
3,766.00
911,269

49.39
3,951.20
103,047

53.59
4,287.20
111,810

58.41
4,672.60
121,867

BJ.BB
5,094.40
132,862

69.73
5,578.40
145,485

START
OF 25111

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

47.48
3,798.40
99,082

49.78
3,9112.40
103,861

54.02
4,321.60
112,707

58.88

V

4,710.40
122,847

64.18
5,134.40
133,905

70.28
5,622.40
146,832

START
OF261h
YEAR

w

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

47.85
3,828.00
99,834

50.18
4,014.40
104,6911

54.«
4,355.20
113,584

59.35
4,748.00
123,828

84.119
5,175.20
13-4,9119

70.84
5,667.20
147,801

START
OF271h

48.23
3,858.40
100,627

50.57
4,045.60
105,509

54.87

4,389.60

59.81
4,784.80
124,788

85.20
5,218.00
136,033

71.-40
5,712.00
148,969

START
OF28111

p

u

«.40

• Rates flOm Longevily Range S and
above renect Master Trooper
pay differential

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•
• Annual rates Isled on lhis schedule are appruxinulte.

X

48.99

114,481

66.94

START
OF 20111

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

Page2of2

Appendbc D (Table 2)

COMMONWEAL TH OF PENNSYLVANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2015
PAY SCALE lYPE SP
Members hired on orafter7/1/2013
SP02
CPRL
STEP

SP04
SRGNT
STEP
E

SP06
LIEUT
STEP
E

SP08
CPT
STEP

SP09
MAJOR
STEP

38.58
2,926.40
78,321

39.51
3,160.80
82,434

42.87
3,429.60
89,444

48.73
3,738.40
97,497

50.94
4,075.20
108,281

4,◄62.40 'THROUGH

38.77
3,101.60
80,890

◄ I.BB

3,350.40
87,378

45.44
3,835.20
94,806

49.53
3,982.40
103,339

54.00
4,320.00
112,668

59.13
4,730.40
123,369

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

39.14
3,131.20
81,662

42.28
3,382.40
88,213

45.87
3,669.60
95,703

50.00
4,000.00
104,320

54.51

59.88

◄,360.80

◄,77◄.40

START
OF71h

113,730

124,518

YEAR

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

39.51
3,160.80
82,434

42.87
3,413.60
89,027

48.30
3,704.00

50.47
4,037.80
105,301

55.02
4,401.80
114,794

60.24
4,819.20
125,685

START
OF81h

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

39.87
3,189.60
83,185

43.07
3,445.60
89,861

55.52
4,441.60
115,837

4,864.00

START
OF9th

97,497

50,94
4,075.20
106,281

60,80

3,738.◄0

128,853

YEAR

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

40.24
3,219.20
83,957

43.46
3,478.80
90,875

47.16
3,772.80
98,395

51.40
4,112.00
107.241

58.03

81.36

F

◄,482.◄0

4,908.80

START
OF10lh

116,901

128,022

40.80
3,248.00
84,708

43.88
3,508.80
91,510

47.59
3,807.20
99,292

51.87

58.54

G

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

4,1◄9.60

4,523.20
117,985

START
OF 11111

108,222

61.92
4,953.60
129,190

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

40.97
3,277.80

48.01
3,840.80
100,168

52.34
4,187.20
109,202

57.05
4,564.00
119,029

62.47
4,997.60
130,337

START
OF 12th

85,460

44.25
3,540.00
92,323

42.18
3,372.80
67,963

44.65
3,572.00
93,158

48.44
3,875.20
101,065

52.80

57.58

4,22◄ .00

◄,60◄.80

110,162

120,093

63.03
5,042.40
131,508

START
OF 13th
YEAR

LONGEVITY
RANGE

A

B

C

D

E

..
....

H

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•
HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

s

27.44
2,195.20
57,251

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

A

B

29.28
2,340.80
81,048

31.09
2,487.20
64,866

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
C

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

32.92
2,633.60
68,684

34.75
2,780.00
72,502

38.84
2,947.20
76,863

D

• Rates from Longevity Range I and
above relled Trooper Ut Class
paydifferenllal.

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
E·

e

98,600
46.73

e

e

55.78
118,379

YEARS
OF
SVC

YEARS 1
5
START
OF 6111

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

J

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL*

42.53
3,402.40
88,735

45.04
3,603.20
93,971

48.87
3,909.60
101,962

53.27
4,261.60
111,143

58.07
4,645.60
121,157

63.59
5,037.20
132,674

START
OF 141h

K

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

42.91
3,432.80
89,527

45.44
3,635.20
94,806

49.30
3,944.00
102,860

53.74
4,299.20
112.123

58.58
4,686.40
122.221

114.15
5,132.00
133,843

START
OF151h

l

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

43.28
3,462.40
90,299

45.83
3,866.40
95,620

49.73
3,978.40
103,757

54.21
4,338.80
113,104

59,09
4,727.20
123,285

84,70
5,178.00
134,990

START
OF181h

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

43.85
3,492.00
91,071

48.23
3,698.40
98,454

50.16
4,012.80
104,854

54.67
4,373.60
114,063

59.60
4,788.00

65.26
5,220.80
136,158

START
OF 17th

M

124,349

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

Page 1012

Appendix D (Table2)

COMMONWEAL 1H OF PENNSYI.VANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY 1,2015
PAY SCALE TYPE SP
Members hired on or alter7/1/2013

LONGEVITY
RANGE

N

0

p

Q

;j

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

s

SP0I
TROOPER
STEP

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

A

B

SP01
'mOOPER
STEP
C

SP01
'mOOPER
STEP
D

SP01
'mOOPER
STEP

e·

44,03
3,522.40

48.62

50.59

3,728.80

91,864

97,288

4.047.20
105,551

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

44.40
3,552.00

47.02
3,781.60
88,103

92,636

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

44.77
3,581.60

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

SP09

CPT
STEP
E

MAJOR
STEP
E

80.11

65.82

4,803.80

5,265.60
137,327

125,414

51.02

55.61

60.62

86.38

4,031.80

4,448.80

4,849.60

5,310.40

108,448

116,025

128,478

138,495

58.08
4,486.40

61.13

86.94

4,890.40

117,005

127,542

5,355.20
139,864

61.64
4,931.20
128.606

5,399.20
140,811

51.44

93,403

4,115.20
107,324

45.15
3,612.00

47.81
3,824.80

51.87

56.54

4,149.60

94,201

99,751

103,222

4,523.20
117,985

45.52

48.20
3,856.00
100,564

52.30

57.01

62.15

68.05

4,184.00

4,560.80

4,972.00

5,444.00

109,119

118,948

52.73

s

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

46.72

T

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAi."

w

55.14
4,411.20
115,044

SP08

47.41

3,641,60
94,973
• Rates Imm Longevity Range S and
above nilled Master Trooper
pay dift'erential

SP06
LIEUT
STEP
E

3,792.80
96,816

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

V

SP04
SRGNT
STEP
E

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

R

u

SP02
CPRL
STEP
E

START
OF1Bth

YEAR
START
OF 19111
YEAR
START
OF 201h

YEAR
START
OF 21s1

YEAR
START
OF 22nd

141,980

YEAR

82.86
5,012.80
130,734

68.61
5,488.80

START
OF23rd

143,148

YEAR

69.17
5,533.60
144,318

START
OF 24111

128,!170

48.60
3.888.00

4,218.40

57.46
4,598.40

101,399

110,016

119,928

48.99

53.16

57.95

3,737.60
97,477

3,919.20
102,213

4,252.80

4,636.00

110,913

120,907

63.17
5,053.60
131,798

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

47.10
3,768.00
98,269

49,39
3,951.20
103,047

53.59
4,287.20
111,810

56.41
4,672.80

83.68
5,094.40

5,578.40

START
OF 25th

121,867

132,862

145,465

YEAR

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL'

47.48

48.78

54,02

58.88

3,798.40
99,062

3,982.40
103,861

4,321.60
112,707

4,710.40
122,847

64.18
5,134.40
133,905

70.28
5,622.40
146,832

START
OF 26th

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

47.85

50.18
4,014.40

54.44

3,828.00
99,1134

59.35
4,748.00
123,828

64.69
5,175.20
134,989

70.64
5,667.20
147.801

START
OF 271h

S.4.117
59.81
4,389,60
4,784.80

85.20
5,218.00
136,033

71.40
5,712.00
148,989

START
OF 28th

HOURLY
X
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•
• Annual rales Isled on lhts schedule are approodmale.

46.35

67.49

YEARS
OF
SVC

3,708.00
98,705

48.23
3,858.40
100,627

104,696
50.57
4,045.60
105,509

4,355.20
113,584

114,481

124,788

69.73

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

Page2012

Appendix E (Table 1)

COMMONWEAL TH OF PENNS'tt VANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2016
PAY SCALE TYPE SP
Memben; hlled prior to 7/1/2013
SP01
TROOPER
STEP

SP02
CPRL
STEP
E

SP04
SRGNT
STEP
E

SP06
LIEUT
STEP
E

SPoa
CPT
STEP
E

SP09
MAJOR
STEP
E

37.68
3,014.40
7B,616

40.69
3,255.20

48.12
3,849.60
100,398

52.45
4,196.00
109,432

4,594.40 THROUGH

84,896

«.15
3,532.00
92,115

39.94
3,195.20
83,331

43,13
3,450.40
89,986

48,80
3,7«.oo
97,644

51.01
4,080,80
108,427

4,448,00

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

40.32
3,225.60
84,124

43.54
3,483.20
90,842

47.24
3,779.20
98,582

51.49
4,119.20
107,429

4,489.60

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

40.89
3,255.20
84,896

43.95
3,518.00
91,697

47.68
3,814.40
99,480

51.97
4,157.60
108,430

E

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

41.07
3,285.60
85,688

44.35
3,548.00
92,532

48.12
3,849.60
100,398

F

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

41.45
3,318.00
88,481

«.78
3,580.80
93,387

G

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

41.82
3,345.60
87,253

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

LONGEVITY
RANGE

A

B

C

D

H

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•
HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

s

31.11
2,488.80
64,908

SP0I
TROOPER
STEP

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

A

B

32.B7
2,629.60
68,580

34.88
2,772.80
72,315

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
C

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

35.64
2,851.20
74,359

38.88
2,932.80
76,487
38.86
3,108.80
81,078

D

• Rates hum Longevity Range I and
above reflect Trooper 1st Class
pay differential.

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
E·

YEARSI
5

60.88
4,870.40
127,020

START
OF 6111

81.45
4,918.00
128,209

START
OF71h

4,532.00
118,195

82.02
4,961.60
129,399

START
OF 8th

52.45
4,196.00
109,432

57.17
4,573.80
119,279

62.60
5,008.00
130.609

START
OF9th

48.57
3,885.60
101,338

52.93
4.234.40
110,433

57.70
4,616.00
120.385

63.17
5,053.60
131,798

START
OF10th

45.17
3,813.60
94,243

49.01
3,920.80
102,254

53.41
4,272.80
111,435

58.22
4,857.80
121,470

83.75
5,100.00
133,008

START
OF 11111

42.20
3,378.00
88,048

.CS.57
3,645.60
95,077

49.45
3,958.00
103,172

53.89
4,311.20
112,438

58.74
4.899.20
122,555

64.32
5,145.80
134,197

START
OF 12th

43.43
3,474.40
90,812

3,678.40
115,933

3,991.20
104,090

54.38
4,350.40
113,458

59.27
4,7.C1.60
123,881

64.90
5,192.00
135,.C07

START
OF 13111

45.98

49.89

55.60

57.43
119,822

YEARS
OF
SVC

116,004
58.12
117,089

58.85

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

J

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

43.81
3,50.c.B0
91,.COS

46.39
3,711.20
96,788

4,026.40
105,009

54.86
4,388.80
114,460

59.79
4,783.20
124,746

85 ..C7
5,237.80
136,597

START
OF 14th

K

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

44.19
3,535.20
92,198

46.79
3,743.20
97,623

50.77
4,061.60
105,927

55.34
4,427.20
115,.C61

60.32
4,825.60
125,852

88.04
5,283.20
137,788

START
OF15lh

L

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

«.58
3,588.40
93.012

47.20
3,776.00
98,478

51.21
4,096.80
108,845

60,84
4,867.20
126,937

118.62
5.329.80
138,996

START
OF161h

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL"

«.96
3,596.80
93,805

47.81
3,808.60
99,334

51.118
4,132.60
107,783

61.37
4,909.60
128,0.C2

67.19
5,375.20
140,185

START
OF 17111

M

50.33

55.82

4,465.60
11M63

58.30
4,504.00
117,464

YEAR

YEAR

VEAR

VEAR

Page 1 of2

AppendbcE (Table 1)

COMMONWEAL1H OF PENNSYLVANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVEJULY 1, 2016
PAY SCALE T'tl'E SP
Members hirad prior1o7/1/2013

LONGEVITY
RANGE
HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

3,828.00
94,618

0

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

p

◄5.35

SP02
CPRL
STEP
E

SPIM
SRGNT
STEP

E

SP06
LIEUT
STEP
E

SP08
CPT
STEP
E

SP09
w.JOR
STEP
E

YEARS
OF
SVC

◄8.01
3,8◄0.80

52.10

56.78

◄,168.00

◄,5◄2.40

108,701

118,466

61.89
4,951.20
1211,127

67.77
5,421.60
141,395

START
OF181h

100,168

3,658..CO
95,411

.CB.42
3,873.60
101,023

4,203,2D
109,619

57.26
.C,58D.80
lt9,.C67

62.42
4,993.60
130,233

68.34
5,467.2D
142,585

START
OF 19111
YEAR

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

46.12
3,689.60
96,225

48.83
3,906.40
101,879

52.98
4,238.40
110,537

57,74
.C,619.20
120,469

62.94
5,035.20
131,318

68.92
5,513.60
143,795

START
OF 20111

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

46.50
3,720.00
97,018

49.23
3,938..CD
102,713

53.42
4,273.60
111,455

58.23
.C,658..CO
121,491

63.46
5.076.80
132,403

69.49
5,559.20
144,984

START
OF 2111

R

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

.C6.88
3,750.40
97,810

49,64
3,971.20
103,569

53.86
4,308,80
112,374

58.71
4,696.80
122,493

63.99
5,119.20
133,509

7D.06
5,604.80
146,173

s

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

47.7.C
3,819.20
99,605

54.30
4,344.00
113,292

59.19

4,0IM.00
11M,424

◄.735.20

7D.64
5,651.20
147,383

START
OF 23rd

123,494

64.51
5,160.80
134,594

T

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

48.12
3,849.60
100,398

50.46
4,036.80
105,280

54.75
.C,380.00
11<1,230

59.67
.C,773.60
12.C,495

65.04
5,203.20
135.699

71.21
5,896.80
148,573

START
OF 24111
YEAR

u

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

48.51
3,880.80
101,211

50.86
.C,068.80
106,114

55.19
4,415.20
115,1.C8

60.15
4,812.00
125,.c97

65.58
5,244.80
138,784

71.79 START
5,743.20 OF 25111
1-49,783 YEAR

V

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

.CB.90
3,912.00
102,025

51.27
4,101.60
108,970

55.113
4,450 ..CO
116,068

60.63
4,850.40
126,-498

66.09
5,287.20
137,890

72.36
5,788.80
150,972

START
OF 26111
YEAR

w

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

49.29
3,943.20
102,839

51.68
4,134.40
1D7,825

58.07
4,485,60
116,984

61.11
4,888.80
127,500

66.61
5,328.80
138,975

72.94
5,835.20
152,182

START
OF 27111

.C9.68
3,974.40
103,652

52.08
4,166.40
108,660

56.51
4,520.80
117,902

61.59
4,927.20
128,501

67.14
5,371.20
140,081

73.51
5,880.80
153,371

START
OF 28111

N

a

~

SPOI
SPOI
SPOI
SP01
SP01
SP01
TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER
STEP
STEP
STEP
STEP
STEP
STEP
s
A
e
C
D
E·

◄5.73

• Rates ln>mLongeviy Range S and
aboverelled Master Trooper
pay dilrerentlal.

HOURLY
X
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•
• Annual rates isled an 11\lsschedule are approJCimate.

50.05

5Z.5◄

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR
START

OF 22nd
YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

Page2 ol 2

Appendix E (Table2)

COMMONWEALTHOF PENNSYLVANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVEJULY 1, 2016
PAY SCALE 'M'E SP
Members hired onor after7/1/2013

LONGEVITY
RANGE

.....
Ui

A

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

B

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

SPOI
SPOI
SP01
SPOI
SP01
SP01
TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER TROOPER
STEP
STEP
STEP
STEP
STEP
STEP
s
A
B
C
0
E·
28.26
2.260.80
58,1162

30.14
2,411.20
62,B84

32.03
2,562.40
86,827

33.91
2,712.80
70,750

SP02
CPRL
STEP

SP04
SRGNT
STEP

E

E

SP06
LIEUT
STEP
E

SPOa
CPT
STEP
E

SP09
MAJOR
STEP
E

YEARS
OF
SVC

35.80
2,B84,00
74,693

37.68
3,014.40
7B,616

40.89
3,255.20
84,8116

44.15
3,532.00
92,115

48.12
3,849.60
100.398

52.45
4,196.00
109,432

57.,43 YEARS1
4,594.40 THROUGH
118,822
5

37.95
3,038.00
79,179

39.IM
3,185.20
83,331

43.13
3,450.40
89,986

46.B0
3,744.00

51.01
4,080.80
106,427

55.60
4,ffl.00
116,004

◄ ,870.◄0

127,020

START
OF61h
YEAR

43.5◄

97,64◄

60.B8

C

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

40.32
3,225.60
B4,124

3,463.20
90,842

47.24
3,779.20
98,562

51.49
4,119.20
107,429

56.12
4.489.60
117,089

61.45
4,916.00
128,209

START
OF7111
YEAR

0

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

40.69
3,255.20
84,8116

43.95
3,516.00
91,697

47.68
3,814.40
99,460

51.97
4,157.60
108,430

56.65
4,532.00
118,195

62.02
4,961.60
129,399

START
OF8111
YEAR

E

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

41.07
3,285.60
85,688

44.35
3,548,00
92,532

48.12
3,849.60
100,398

52.45
4,196.00
109,432

57.17
4,573.60
119.279

62.60
5,008,00
130,609

START
Of 9111
YEAR

F

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

41.45
3,316.00
86,4B1

44.76
3,580.80
93,387

48,57
3,885.60
101,338

52.93
4.234.40
110,433

57.70
4,6111.00
120,385

63.17
5,053.60
131,798

START
OF 10th
YEAR

G

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

41.82
3,345.60
87.253

45.17
3,1113.60
94,243

49.01
3,920.80
102,254

53.41
4,272.80
111,435

58.22
4,657.60
121,470

63.75
5,100.00
133,008

START
OF 11111

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

42.20
3,376.00
118,046

3,845,60
95,077

49.45
3,956.00
103,172

53.89
4,311.20
112,436

58.74
4,699.20
122,555

64.32
5,145.60
134,197

START
OF 12111

43.43
3,474.40
90,612

45.98
3,678.40
95,933

49.89
3,991.20
104.090

54.38
4,350.40
113,458

511.27
4,741.60
123,861

84,90
5,192.00
135,407

START
OF 13111

◄6.39

H

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

• Rates from Longevity Range I and
above rafted Trooper 111Class
pay differential

◄5.57

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

J

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

43.81
3,504.80
91,405

3,711.20
116,788

50.33
4,026.40
105,009

54.B6
4,388.80
114,460

59.79
4,783.20
124,748

65.47
5.237.60
136,597

START
OF 14111

K

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

44.19
3,535.20
92,198

46.711
3,743.20
97,623

50,77
4,061.60
105.927

55.34
4,427.20
115,481

60.32
4,825.60
125,852

66.04
5,283.20
137.786

START
OF 15th

L

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

44.56
3,568.40
93,012

47.2D
3,776.00
98,478

51.21
4,096.80
106,845

55.82
4,465.60
116,463

60.84
4.867.20
128.937

66.112 START
5,329.60 OF 18th
138,9116 YEAR

M

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

44,116
3,598.80
93,B05

47.81
3,808.80
99,334

51.86
4,132.60
107,783

56.30
4,504.00
117.464

61.37
4,909.60
126,042

67.19
5,375.20
140,185

YEAR

YEAR

START
OF 171h

YEAR

Page 1 of2

Appendix E (Table 2)

COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
STATE POLICE PAY SCHEDULE
EFFECTIVE JULY 1,2018
PAY SCALE TYPE SP
Membe,s hired on oraner 71112013

LONGEVITY
RANGE

N

0

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

A

B

SPOI
TROOPER
STEP
C

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

D

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

SP01
TROOPER
STEP
E·
45.35

3.628.00
94,1118

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

45.73
3,658.40

95,411

SP02
CPRL
STEP
E

100,168

108,701

4,542.40
118,468

<l,951.20
129,127

62.42
<l,993.60

48.42

52.54

57.26

3,873.60
101,023

<l,203.20

4,580.80
119,467

48.83

52.98
4,238.40

46.50

49.23
3,938.40

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

46.88

49.64

R

3,750.40
97,810

3,971.20
103,569

s

HOURLY
BIWEEKl.Y
ANNUAL•

47.74
3,819.20
99,605

4,004.00

u

V

w

E

4,168.00

3,720.00
97,018

T

E

SP08
CPT
STEP
E

56.78

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

• Rates Imm Longevty Range Sand
above iellect Master Trooper
pay dilrerenliaL

SPOIi
LIEUT
STEP

52.10

3,906.40
101,879

411.12

SP04
SRGNT
STEP

48.01
3,840,110

3,689.60
98,225

a

...

s

SPOI
TROOPER
STEP

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

p

0)

SP01
TROOPER
STEP

102,713

50.05
104,424

109,1119

110,537

57.74
4,619.20
120,469

81.119

130,233

112.94
5,035.20
131,318

SP09
MAJOR
STEP

E
&1.n
5,421.60
141,395

68.34
5,467.20
142,585

68.92
5,513.60
143,795

YEARS
OF
SVC
START
OF 18111
YEAR
START
OF 191h

YEAR
START
OF201h

YEAR

53.42

58.23

63,46

89,49

4,273.60
111,455

4,658.40

5,076.80
132,403

5,559.20
1«,984
70.06
5,604.80
148,173

START
OF 22nd

122,493

83,99
5,119.20
133,509

59.19
4,735.20
123,494

64,51
5,160.80
134,594

70.64
5,651.20
147,383

START
OF 23rd

65.04
5,203.20
135,899

71.21
5,698.80
148,573

START
OF 24111

71.711
5,743.20
149,783

START
OF 25111

53.88
<l,308,80
112,374
54,30

4,3«.00
113,292

121,491
58,71

4,898.80

START
OF 21st

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

48.12
3,849.60
100,398

4,038.80
105,280

4,380.00
114,230

59.87
4,n3.60
124,495

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

<l8.51
3,880.80
101,211

50.88
4,068.80
106,114

55.19
<l,415.20
115,148

60.15
4,812.00
125,497

5,244.80
138,784

HOURLY
BIWEEKl.Y
ANNUAL•

3,912.00
102,025

51.27
<l,101.60
106,1170

4,450.40

60.63
050.40
126,4118

5.287.20
137,890

72.38
5,788.80
150,972

START
OF 26111

HOURLY
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•

49.29
3,943.20
102,839

51.68
4,134.40
107,825

58.07

61.11

4,485.80

4,888.80

72.94
5,835.20
152,182

START
OF 27111

127,500

68.61
5,328.80
138,975

81.59
4,927.20
128,501

67,14
5,371.20
140,081

73,51
5,880,80
153,371

START
OF 28111

HOURLY
X
BIWEEKLY
ANNUAL•
• Annual rates istec:ton 1111s
schedule aie approximate.

48.90

49.68
3,974.40
103,652

50.<l8

52.08
4,168.40
108,680

54.75

55.83
118,068

116,98<l
56.51
4,520.80
117,902

65.58

68.09

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

YEAR

Page2of2

APPENDIXF
Members of the Pennsylvania State Police must be morally and ethically above reproach
at all times regardless of duty status. All members shall respect the sanctity of the law and shall
be committed to holding themselves to the highest standard of accountability. No member shall
depart from standards of professional conduct or disobey the law.
Members should be subject to disciplinary action only for "just cause." The following
standards shall govern the elements of"just cause" for the misconduct described below and these
standards shall constitute a "clean slate" relating to the twelve terminable offenses described
below in that they shall supersede and replace all prior standards, agreements, past practices, and
arbitration awards on the same subjects.
Certain conduct immediately and absolutely threatens the integrity of the Department's
public duty and responsibility. In the following circumstances, the proper level of discipline is
termination of employment, notwithstanding any mitigating circumstances. Such conduct
includes, but is not limited to, the following:
[ l]
Engaging in any action that constitutes the comm1ss1on of a felony or a
misdemeanor which carries a potential sentence of more than one (1) year, or in any action that
constitutes the commission of an equivalent offense in another jurisdiction, state, or territory.
Neither a criminal conviction nor the pendency of criminal charges is necessary for disciplinary
action in such circumstances. In addition, a declination of prosecution shall not preclude
disciplinary action.
[2]
Engaging in domestic violence involving physical abuse of any victim; or
engaging in activity which would cause a reasonable person to be in fear of bodily injury to the
extent the member's conduct falls under subsection [l] above.
[3]
Any use of a firearm to threaten another except as appropriate in the scope of
employment (whether or not a specific, officially assigned, duty) or in the defense of self or
others. This includes the use of a loaded or unloaded firearm to threaten another, regardless
whether as a joke or in horseplay.
[4]
Engaging in sexual misconduct, as defined in AR 4-25; or engaging in sexual
harassment as defined in AR 4-26 which is of a serious nature, including use of position to obtain
or attempt to obtain sexual favors; or engaging in conduct which constitutes sexual harassment,
as defined in AR 4-26, subsequent to disciplinary action for prior serious sexual harassment.
[5]
The commission of a serious act of deception during a criminal, civil or
administrative investigation or proceeding, when under a specific, official obligation to be
truthful, involving intentional (1) lying; (2) fabrication; (3) misleading acts or words; (4) civil or
criminal fraud; or (5) perjury.

77

Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Agreement, no member may be subject
to disciplinary charges for violating this subsection in regard to a statement or statements the
member made in a Departmental disciplinary investigation involving another member before the
allegations involving the underlying investigation of that other member have been either
dismissed by the Department or sustained or dismissed by an arbitrator as provided herein.
[6]
Any activity that constitutes an intentional violation of Chapter 39 of the Crimes
Code (relating to Theft and Related Offenses).
[7]
Any use of any illegal substances, prohibited under 35 P.S. § 780-101 et seq.,
(Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act), or any substance use that constitutes
the commission of an offense under Federal law or in any other jurisdiction, state, or territory,
either on or off duty; or any use of controlled substances obtained by illegal means, either on or
off duty.
[8]

Positive drug test result under FR 3-5.

[9]
"Driving under the influence" pleas, convictions or ARD under one of the
following circumstances:
(a)

Second or subsequent DUI offense while employed by the Commonwealth
(regardless of whether on or off duty); or

(b)

Involving a hit and run of a vehicle or property; or

(c)

While operating a state-owned vehicle.

[ 1O] Loss of Pennsylvania operating privileges for 180 or more days, except for recall
or suspension of operating privileges of any person whose incompetency has been established
under Title 75 Pa. C.S. § 1519 (Motor Vehicle Code).
[11] Fighting or the use of other physical violence on the job, other than as reasonably
necessary in the strict performance of a member's duties as a law enforcement officer.
[12] Any period of incarceration for a misdemeanor conviction that results in the
member being disqualified from accessing information from the CLEAN system in accordance
with the FBI Criminal Justice Information Security (CJIS) Policy.
This list is not all-inclusive and termination of employment may be the proper level of
discipline in other situations as well.
A criminal standard of proof shall not be applied to the review of any termination
decision.

78

The above provisions are effective for discipline arising out of any conduct occurring, in
full or in part, on or after January 1, 2005. These provisions supersede any prior disciplinary
penalties imposed for the twelve (12) offenses specifically set forth herein, by either the
Department, Commonwealth, or any arbitrator, and no such prior penalties may be used as
precedent in cases involving the above twelve (12) offenses.

79

APPENDIXG
KEY

ARBITRATOR
Galfand
Gershenfeld
By Agreement
Gershenfeld
Unterberger
Letter of
Agreement
By Agreement
Sb
By Agreement
6
7
Loewenberg
8
McDennott
9
Powell
By Agreement
10
IOA By Agreement
(to clarify language)
11
Weinstein
12
By Agreement
12a Side Letter of
Agreement
12b Side Letter of
Agreement
Herring
13
14
K.asher
14a Side Letter of
Agreement
14b Side Letter of
Agreement
15
Pereles
16
By Agreement
17
Dilauro
17a Side Letter of
Agreement
17b Side Letter of
Agreement
18
By Agreement
18a Side Letters of
Agreement
18b Side Letter of
Agreement

NO.
I
2
3
4
5
5a

DATE OF
AWARD/AGREEMENT
12/21/70
12/28/71
9/27/72
12/27/73
12/27/74

EFFECTIVE
DATE
7/1/71
7/1/72
7/1/73
7/1/74
7/1/75

5/10/75
5/21/75
11/12/75
12/23/76
3/24/78
12/21/78
11/15/79
6/13/80

1/1/76
1/1/76
7/1/76
7/1/77
7/1/78
7/1/79
7/1/80
7/1/80

5/7/81
12/14/81

7/1/81
7/1/82

3/2/82

2/1/82

7/1/83
9/15/83
3/22/84

1/1/82
7/1/83
7/1/84

3/15/84

7/1/84

4/13/84
12/14/84
10/15/85
2/17/88

4/13/84
7/1/85
7/1/86
7/1/88

2/26/88

7/1/88

8/29/89
12/1/89

8/29/89
7/1/90

5/10/90

7/1/90

5/25/90

7/1/90
80

NO.
18c
19
19a
19A
19b
19c
19d
20
20a
20b
20c
20d
20e
20f
20g
20h
20A
21
22
22A
23
24
25
26
27

ARBITRATOR
Side Letter of
Agreement
Dilauro
Letter of
Agreement
By Agreement
Letter of
Agreement
Letter of
Agreement
Letter of
Agreement
Schwartz
Side Letter of
Agreement
Side Letter of
Agreement
Side Letter of
Agreement
Side Letter of
Agreement
Side Letter of
Agreement
Side Letter of
Agreement
Side Letter of
Agreement
Side Letter of
Agreement
Schwartz
By Agreement
By Agreement
Side Letter of
Agreement
Colflesh
Skonier
Side Letter of
Agreement
Talarico
Side Letter of
Agreement

DATE OF
AWARD/AGREEMENT

EFFECTIVE
DATE

9/13/90
6/15/92
1/26/93

10/1/90
7/1/92
7/1/92

11/24/92
6/16/93

7/1/94
8/15/93

6/23/93

6/23/93

1/11/94

1/1/94

7/11/95
5116/96

7/1/95
5/16/96

6/12/96

6/12/96

5/5/97

5/5197

5/28/97

6/28/97

11/5/97

11/5/97

12/11/97

12/11/97

1/6/98

1/6/98

1/26/98
8/29/97
10/7/97
1/7/00
8/31/00

1/26/98
12/29/97
7/1/98
7/1/00
7/1/00

12/22/04
12/24/08
3/25/11

7/1/04
7/1/08
3/25/11

06/27/13
11/26/14

7/1/12
7/1/14
81

INDEXOF REFERENCESTO ARBITRATION
AWARDS AND AGREEMENTS

Recognition....................10A
Prior ArbitrationAwards
& Agreements
Section 1....................3,4,6,7,11,12
Section2....................9,12
Distributionof Booklet........4,10A,12
Salaries
Section 1....................23
Section 2....................23
Section 3............... 23
Section4 ............... 23
Section 5....................17,lSa
Section 6....................l,2,3,4,6,8,15,16,18,19,20,24
Section7....................5a,10A, 26
Section 8....................11,14a,22A
Section9....................1,10A,20f,22A
Section 10...................23, 26
Section 11............... 24
Union Security& Assessments
Section 1....................2,8,9,13,l7b
Section2....................17b
Section 3....................17b
Section4 ....................10
Scheduling
Section 1....................9,17b
Section 2....................9,13,20,22A
Section3....................9,11,20,26
Section4....................8,20
Section5....................4
Section6 ............... 17,23
Section7....................17,22A
Section 8.....................23
Overtime
Section 1................... .1, 10A
Section2 ....................4
Section 3....................5,I0A
Shift Differential
Section 1....................5,5a,6,15,23
Section2....................Sa
Section3....................23, 24
Call Time......................3,1OA,19,19a,20,26
82

Alert Time
Section 1....................2, 10A
Section 2....................1,10A
Holidays
Section 1................... .3, lOA,11,12,13,26
Section 2....................3
Section 3....................3
Section4....................4,9,10,lOA,14b,20
Personal Days
Section 1...................4,9,10A,12,13,16,18,19,19a,20,20b,22A,
26
Section 2...................lOA,20,23
Section 3............... 20b
Vacations
Section l.. ..................2,4,10A,12b,16,18,19,19a, 20,22A
Section 2....................l,7,10A,12,l2b,19,l 9a,20,22A
Section 3....................9,l0A
Section 4....................8,1OA
Section 5....................4,8,l0A,20
Section 6....................8
Section 7....................12
Section 8....................20b
Sick Leave
Section 1....................1,I 0A,12b,20
Section2....................1,9,10,12,12b,13,14,15,16,l7,19,20
Section 3....................4,lOA,24
Section4....................8,13, 24
Section 5....................6,9, l 0,12,12a,13,14,15,16,17,20
Section 6 ....................17
Section 7....................l 8b
Section 8....................20b
Medical Leave Extension
Section 1....................7,8,lOA,19d,20f,20g,23
Section2....................12,l 9d,23
Section 3....................7,8,10A, 19d,20g
Section4....................20f
Life Insurance.................1,2,10A,23
Survivor Benefits~PSTA ScholarshipFund
Section 1....................8,13,19,19c,22A,23
Section 2....................17,18a, 19c, 25
DisabilityBenefits
Section 1....................2, 10A,22A
Section2....................7,22A
Hospital & Medical Insurance...1,2,3,7,10,ll,12,13,16,17,24, 26
PrescriptionDrug Plan............ 5a,5b,10,22A,23,24, 26
83

Vision Care Plan...............7,10,l l,12,17,19,22A
Dental Care Plan..............4,5,10,13,22A,24
Doctor Office Visit Plan/
Health ReimbursementArrangement.....13,22A,23,24, 26
EmergencyCounselingPlan
Section l. .............. 10,12,17a,18,19
Section2 ............... 10,l 7a,18,19,20,20a
Retirement.....................3,4,8,9,10A,12,l 7,20,20h,22A,23
Discipline
Section 1....................19b
Section2 ............... 19b,23
Section3....................19b,20e
Section4....................l 9b
Section 5...................l 9b,20,23
Section6...................l 9b,20
Section 7...................19b,20,23,26
Section 8...................19b,20
Section 9...................19b,20,23
Section I0..................19b
Section 1l ..................l 9b
Section 12............... 23
Legal Counsel
Section 1....................5,7, 24
Section2....................7,IOA,13,24
Section3....................7
Section4 ............... 24
GrievanceProcedure
Section l ....................l 9b,23
Section2....................19b,20
Section3 ...................l 9b,22A
Sections4-7 ............ l 9b
Section 8................ 23
Section9 ................ 23
Section 10.............. 23
Section 11............. .19b
Section 12.............. 23
Sections 13-16......... 19b
Section 17.............. 23
AdministrativeLeave
Section 1....................4,10,I 0A
Section2 ....................9,20, 24
Section3....................Sa,8
Section4 ....................4,8
Union Business.................I 0, 24
84

Personnel Files................6
ClothingMaintenance...........4,6,8,l 0, 11,12,18, 24
OutsideEmployment
Section 1....................2,4
Section2....................5, 11
Reductionin Force
Section 1....................8
Section2....................8, l 0A
Member Treatment
Section 1............... 18c
Section2 ............... l 8c
TemporaryAssignment...........9, 10A
SpecializedPositions
and Training
Sections 1-3................17,l 8a,20A,26, 27
Section4 ................ 23, 26, 27
Sections 5-8................17,l 8a,20A,26, 27
Section 9....................20A,20f, 26, 27
Section 10...................20A, 26, 27
Section l l ...................20f
Section 12............... 23
Transfers
Section 1...................9,11,18,20
Section2...................9
Section3...................9,18, 26, 27
Badge, RetirementID, HonorableDischarge
Upon Retirement... .10,12,19,22A,24, 26
Car UtilizationStudy.........11,12
Health Care Cost Containment
Committee...................15,16,18a
Special CommitteePromotionSystem............16,18a
Side Letters..................lOA,11,13
Physical Fitness Committee
Sections 1-7................... 17
Section8 ...................... 23
Family Care Leave
Section 1-3.................l 9d
Section4...................20f
Section 5...................20b
LimitedDuty................26
Section 1................ 26
Section2................ 26
85

PoliticalAction CommitteeDeductions
Sections 1-4............ 20c, 24
Leave Donation Prograrn.......... 23, 24, 25, 26
Civilianization............ 24
Tobacco Use.............. 24
Health Care Shop Around... 24
Tenn of Award and Agreement....23

86

