AGREEMENT
THIS Agreement, made and entered into this

/f day of

5~P,t°~~2017,

by and between

COUNCIL OF THE BOROUGH Of LEETSDALE, Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, (hereinafter
referred to as "Borough"), party of the first part,
A

N
D

WAGE AND POLICY UNIT of the Police Department of the 13OROUGI-I OF
LEETSDALE, acting by and through their representatives, (hereinafter referred to as "Unit"),
party of the second part,

WITNESSETH:
WHEREAS, the Borough and the Unit have settled their differences through a collective
bargaining process; and,
WHEREAS, the Borough and the Unit agree that they are bound by the terms of Act 111.
NOW, THEREfORE, for and in consideration of the covenants herein contained and
intending they be legally bound hereby, the parties hereto do hereby covenant and agree as
follows:

ARTICLE I - RECOGNITION
By execution or this Agreement, the Unit certifies that they have been designated by 51%
or more of the members of the Leetsdale Police force as the bargaining agents for said Police
Department with respect to the terms and conditions of their employment, including
compensation, hours, working conditions, retirement, pensions and other benefits.

ARTICLE2 - TERM
This Agreement shall cover a five (5) year period commencing January I, 2018 and
ending December 31, 2022.

ARTICLE 3 - SALARY
A.

The Base hourly rate shall apply to the rank of Top patrolman for the following

years:

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
B.

The Base hourly rate shall apply to the rank of Sergeant for the following years:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

C.

2018 - $33.47;
2019-$34.31;
2020 - $35.34;
2021 - $36.22;
2022 - $37.31.

2018-$35.16;
2019 - $36.04;
2020 - $37.12;
2021 - $38.05;
2022 - $39.19.

The following base hourly rate shall apply to all full-time patrolman during the

employment periods indicated which occur prior to attaining the rank of Top patrolman:

D.

I.

During the first six months of employment - 66% of Top Patrolman's
hourly rate;

2.

During employment months six through twelve - 75% of Top Patrolman's
hourly rate;

3.

During employment months twelve through eighteen - 83% of Top
Patrolman's hourly rate;

4.

During employment months eighteen through l\venty four - 91% of Top
Patrolman's hourly rate.

Upon completion of the twenty-forth month of employment, a patrolman attains

the rank of Top patrolman and is entitled to I 00% of the hourly rate of the said rank.

E.

The base hourly rate for part-time patrolman for 2018 shall be $21.03; it shall be

$21.56 per hour for 2019; it shall be $22.21 per hour for 2020 and it shall be $22. 77 per hour for
2021 and it shall be $23.45 per hour for 2022. Part-time patrolmen who work on a holiday shall
be paid at the rate of one and one-half (I ½) time the regular hourly rate then in effect for parttime patrolmen. Part-time patrolmen vvill be paid a minimum of two (2) hours at the rate of one
and one-half times his or her regular hourly rate of pay for local, minor judiciary or County
Court hearings he or she is required to attend when off duty. In the event his or her attendance
shall be required for more then two (2) hours, he or she will be paid for the total number of hours
in attendance.
F.

Part-lime patrolman will be paid ½ of the yearly hourly part-time base pay rate

during their training period. Training will end when deemed completed by the Police Chief.

ARTICLE 4-OVERTIME, COMPENSATORYTIME AND PART-TIME POLICE
OFFICERS
A.

Part-time officers will be called out first for all overtime, followed by full-time

Patrolman, Sergeant, and the Chief of Police.
B.

In the event that an overtime event is paid for by an outside source (i.e., School

District, PennDOT, Construction Co., etc.) then the call out order for said overtime shall be:
Full-time officers and then Part-time officers. Full-time officers will rotate overtime equally.
C.

Definition of work hours: A normal bi-weekly pay period shall consist or 80 hours.

Normal working shifts are eight (8) hours. The following shifts are excepted, but can be changed
for additional man po,ver: 07:00 Hrs. to 15:00 Hrs., 15:00 llrs. to 23:00 Hrs., and 23:00 llrs. to
07:00 Hrs. Scheduling will be done using the above shifts or unless additional manpower is
added. The workday shall be twenty-four (24) hours period each clay beginning at 07:00 Hrs. and
ending at 07:00 1lrs. the following day. When an officer works more than 40 hours per •.veek,he

will receive compensation at a rate of one and half times the normal hourly rate. No officer will
be required to work more than sixteen ( 16) consecutive hours.
D.

Compensatory Time: The following rules apply to the use of compensatory time:
I.

May only be taken when a part-time officer is available and willing to
work during said shift.

2.

It must be used in eight-hour blocks of time (i.e., whole shifts).

3.

It must be requested in a sufficient time period in order to fill the shift
with a part-time officer.

4.

Compensatory time can only have a maximum reserve or accumulation of
one hundred twenty (120) hours per year.

5.

At the end of the calendar year, a police officer will not lose compensatory
time if it is not used. Rather, at the option of the police officer, either the
entire amount of compensatory time will be carried over to the following
year or in lieu thereof, the police officer may elect to be paid for one-half
(1/2) of the accumulated compensatory time at the rate of time and one-

half ( I 1/2) the officer's regular rate and the remaining one-ha! f ( 1/2) of
the accumulated compensatory time shall be carried over to the following
year.
E.

Shift Change: Policeman may, by mutual agreement, change shifts or trades vvith

one another for personal reasons, subject to the approval of the Chief or OIC, which approval
shall not be unreasonably withheld; provided however, the Borough shall not under any
circumstances be liable for, or required to pay, any overtime as a result of any such shift or turn
changes.

ARTICLE5 - SICK TIME
Sick time shall be accumulated by full time police officers at the rate of twelve (12) days
per year beginning on January I of each year with a maximum reserve or accumulation of one
hundred twenty ( 120) days.
A.

"Sick days" are equivalent to one regular work day and shall be monitored by the

Chief of Police and Borough Secretary. The Borough may request a written certificate of
verification of illness from a licensed medical doctor when a police officer is absent from work
for three or more consecutive days. Two hour advance notice is required for call off on a sick
day unless the officer is unable to give such notice due to nature of illness.
8.

Accumulated sick days in excess of one hundred t\,venty( 120) days qualify for the

Borough's sick day buy back program as follows:
I.

Qualifying sick days are paid at the rate of 50% of their cash value. The
cash value shall be calculated based upon a normal working shift of eight
(8) hours straight time, without shift differential.

2.

The sick day buy back program is only available where no sick days were
used in the given calendar year.

3.

Qualifying sick days eligible through the buy back program must redeem
the benefit annually.

ARTICLE 6(A) - LIFE INSURANCE
A.

The Borough shall provide each full-time Police Officer with a Group Term Life

Insurance Policy that has a benefit payment in the amount of $ I 00,000.00. The _terms and
conditions arc set forth in the attached Policy from Standard Life Insurance Company.

ARTICLE 6(13)- SHORT TERM DISABILITY

The Borough shall provide each full-time Police Officer with a Short Term Disability
Policy vvhichprovides benefits from the first day of disability caused by an accident and from the
eighth day of a qualifying sickness. The benefit amount shall be 66 2/3% of the then current
salary and shall provide benefits for a 26 week period. Other terms and conditions are set forth
in the attached policy.
ARTICLE 6(C)-LONG TERM DISABILITY

The Borough agrees to provide long-term disability insurance coverage for full time
police officers upon terms and conditions to be negotiated by the parties.

ARTICLE 7 - SIZE OF FORCE

During the period covered by this Agreement, the Borough agrees that the Police
Department shall maintain a minimum strength of four (4) full time police officers. Additional
officers may be hired on a part time basis as per current law, provided however that such officers
are considered as part of the certification of the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board of the
Borough of Leetsdale Wage and Policy Unit. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to
prohibit the Borough from affecting a lay-off.
ARTICLE 8 - CLOTHING ALLOWANCE EDUCATIONAL

A.

INCENTIVE

The uniform clothing allowance shall be set as Eight Hundred Twenty Five

($825.00) Dollars per year from 2018 through 2022. Any unused portion will be applied to the
next year's allocation.
13.

Upon termination of employment, whether by removal, resignation, retirement, or

death, any unused portion of said allowance shal I revert to the General Fund.

C.

Uncler no circumstances shall any payment for unused clothing allovvance be clue

any Policeman, his heirs, executors or assigns.
D.

Uniform requirements for part-time personnel shall be considered at the time of

their hiring and they shall be granted a $200.00 allowance for same as long as said officer is
actively working.
E.

The Borough shall replace bullet proof vests for full time officers upon the

expiration of the warranty regarding same.

r-.

Items that arc damaged in the line of duty will be replaced by the Borough as long

as the damaged item shall be turned in to Borough.

EDUCATIONAL

A.

INCENTIVE

:\

('-JcA. 30;

In order to encourage all full-time officers to better themselves educationally in

the field of police science, an Educational Incentive Program is hereby established that will
reimburse the officer for tuition, student fees or any other fee associated with registration, books
and lab fees. Upon presentation of a course completion, a report sheet or official transcript, the
following reimbursement will be paid: A or B = I 00%, C = 80%, D = 50% and F = 0%.
B.

Any full-time officer who acquires a Bachelors Degree or an Associates Degree

shall be eligible for an education bonus in accordance \Viththe following:
I.

Education course credits or degree must be related to police and criminal science

as determined and approved by the Police Chief.
2.

Proof' of such degree completion must be submitted to the employer for
verification and shall be placed in the employee's personnel file. Such
documentation must be submitted to the employer prior to payment of any benefit
under this provision.

3.

Application payment shall be made annually in the first pay period in or following
January of each calendar year in which an employee is eligible. Such payment
shall be in one lump sum bonus.

4.

Payment for each Bachelors Degree shall be in the amount of $600.00 annually.
Payment for each Associates Degree shall be in the amount of$400.00 annually.

ARTICLE 9 - VACATION & LEAVE OF ABSENCE

The vacation schedule for all full-time members of the Police Department shall be as
follows upon completion of:
6 months service
I through 2 years service
3 through 7 years service
8 through 20 years service
21 through 25 years service
Over 26 years service

I week
2 weeks
3 weeks
4 weeks
5 weeks
6 weeks

A patrolman's seniority shall be observed in the scheduling of vacation. A week is 5 days.
In addition, a full-time officer who has completed three years of service may be granted leave of
absence, without pay or benefits and such conditions as determined by the Borough Council.
ARTICLE IO(A) - PENSIONS
A.

PENSIONS - BENEFITS CALCULATION PERIOD

Effective with retirements on or after January I, 1979, the monthly pension benefits shall
be based upon the monthly average earnings of the pol ice officer during the last 36 months of
employment.
13.

PENSIONS - SOCIAL SECURITY OFFSET

Effective ,vith retirements on or after December 31, 1991, the monthly offset of Social
Security benefits tO\vard pension benefits shall be reduced from sixty-five percent (65%) to zero
percent (0%).
C.

PENSIONS - SERVICE INCREMENTS

Effective with retirements on or after December 31, 1991, the normal retirement benefit
that the police officer shall be entitled to, shall be increased by the length of service increment of

twenty five dollars ($25.00) a month for each year of service in excess of twenty five (25) years
a maximum increment of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month.
D.

PENSIONS - DISABILITY

Effective January 1, 1997, the police pension plan shall be modified to include long-term
disability benefits. The total amount of disability to be provided by the plan shall be determined
by the pension plan members' years of active duty service on the Leetsdale Police Force
according to the following schedule:
Years of Active Duty Service

Percent of Normal Retirement Benefits

0-4
5-9
10-14
15-19
20 and over

0
25
50
75
100

Eligibility for long term disability shall be made by the Borough of the basis of the
recommendation of the appropriate insurance carrier or physicians approved by the Borough.
Since payments arc to be made from the Pension Fund, the disability must meet the requirements
of the applicable law.
ARTICLE lO{Bl - DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN (DROP)

Effective January 1, 2013, a DROP Plan will be instituted in accordance with the
following provisions. Officers eligible to participate in this Plan are those attaining the age of 55
who have completed 25 or more years of credited service during the term of this Award.
Participation in the DROP Plan is open to the above eligible Officers through
December 31, 2020.

The Borough docs not guarantee that the DROP program will

continue beyond the term of this Agreement and retains the managerial prerogative to

discontinue the program at the expiration of this Agreement with notice to the Wage and
Policy Unit.
Section 1:

Definitions

DROP - The Deferred Retirement Option Plan created as an optional form of benefit under the
existing Leetsdale Borough Police Pension Fund.
Subsidiary DROP Participant Account - A separate, interest bearing, subsidiary DROP
participant account established to accumulate the DROP pension benefit for a DROP participant.
Member - A full time Leetsdale Borough Police omcer covered by the Plan.
Participant - A Police Officer who is eligible for normal retirement pursuant to the pension plan
and who has elected to participate in the DROP program.
Effective Date of Participation - The day following the effective date of the member's regular
retirement.
Plan - The Leetsdale Borough Police Pension Plan as it applies to the Leetsdale Borough Police
Officer Members.

Section 2:

DROP Provisions

(A)

Eligibility - Effective January 1, 2013, members from the Leetsdale Borough Police
Officers' bargaining unit that have not retired prior to the implementation of the DROP
program may enter into the DROP on the first day of any month following the attainment
of age 55 and the completion of 25 or more years of credited service with the Leetsdale
Borough Police Department.

(B)

Written Election - An eligible Member of the Plan electing to participate in the DROP
program must complete and execute a "DROP"' Election Form: prepared by Leetsdale
Borough, which shall evidence the Member's participation in the DROP program, and
document the Participant's rights and obligations under the DROP. The form must be
signed and notarized by the Member and be submitted to the Borough within thirty (30)
clays of the elate on which the member wishes the DROP election to be effective. The
DROP Election Form shall include an irrevocable notice to the Borough that the Member
shall terminate from employment with the Lectsclalc Borough Police Department
effective on a specific date ("resignation date") no later than sixty (60) months from the
effective elate of the DROP election. An Officer shall cease work as a Leetsdale Borough
Police Officer on the Otlicer·s resignation elate, unless the Employer terminates or
honorably discharges the Officer prior to the resignation date. In addition, all retirement
documents required by the Police Pension Plan Administrator must be filed and presented
to the Borough for approval of retirement and commencement of the monthly pension

benefits. Once the retirement application has been approved by the Police Pension
Administrator, it shall become irrevocable.
Alier a member enters the DROP program, contributions to the pension plan by the
Participant and the Borough on behalf of the participant will cease, and the amount of the
monthly benefits will be frozen except for any applicable cost-ot~living adjustment
(COLA) increase awarded to all pension recipients.
Members shall be advised to consult a Tax Advisor, of their choice, prior to considering
the DROP program, as there may be serious tax implications and/or consequences to
participating in the DROP program.
(C)

Limitations on Pension Accrual - After the effective date of the DROP election, the
Participant shall no longer earn or accrue additional years of continuous service for
pens10n purposes.

(D)

Benefit Calculations - For all Plan purposes, continuous service of a Member
participating in the DROP program shall remain as it existed on the effective date of
commencement of participation in the DROP program. Service thereafter shall not be
recognized or used for the calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the
Plan. The average monthly compensation of the member for pension calculation
purposes shall remain as it existed on the effective date of commencement of
participation in the DROP program.

(E)

Payments to DROP Account - The monthly retirement benefits that would have been
payable had the member elected to cease employment and receive a normal retirement
benefit shall, upon the Member commencing participation in the DROP program, be
credited on the first day of each month into a separate subsidiary DROP participant
ledger account established to track and accumulate the Participant's monthly pension
benefits. This account shall be designated the Subsidiary DROP Participant Account.
The account shall be managed by the Borough pursuant to the same fiduciary obligations
and principles applicable to management of the municipal pension plans.

(F)

Earlv Termination - A Participant may change the DROP termination date to an earlier
date and thereby effectuate a complete termination from service. No penalty shall be
imposed for early termination of DROP participation. Participation in the DROP does
not guarantee the DROP participant's employment during the period specified for DROP
participation. It is recognized that the Participant shall not be permitted to make any
withdrawals from the DROP Account until DROP participation has ended.

(G)

Pavout - Upon the termination date set forth in the DROP Election Form or on such date
as the Participant withdraws or is terminated from the DROP program, if earlier, the
terminating DROP participant, or if deceased, the participant's survivor or named
beneficiary, shall elect a method of receiving payment of the DROP benefits.
Distribution, regardless of the method specified, shall be made within forty-five (45) days
following the actual termination of Participant's employment with the Leetsdale Borough

Police Department. The following options for distribution shall be available to and
selected on the approved form by the Participant, Participant's survivor or beneficiary:
(I) the accumulated balance in the Subsidiary DROP Participant Account shall be paid to
the Participant (of the Participant's survivor or named beneficiary) in a single lump-sum
payment less withholding taxes; or (2) as a direct rollover to an eligible retirement plan as
defined in Section 402(c)(8)(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of I 986; or, in the case of
an eligible retirement plan that is an individual retirement annuity as described in Section
402(c)(9) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. If the Participant, Participant's survivor
or beneficiary termination date, the Borough shall pay the balance as a lump sum. If the
participant selects a rollover option, he or she must submit all appropriate paperwork
from the IRA custodian within the required election period.

(I I)

Disability During DROP - If a Participant becomes eligible for a disability pension
benefit and terminates employment, the monthly normal retirement benefits to the DROP
Participant shall terminate.

(I)

Death - If a Participant dies before the DROP Account balance is paid, the Participant's
surviving spouse or beneficiary shall have the same rights as the Participant to withdraw
the DROP Account balance. The monthly benefit credited to the Participant's DROP
Account during a month of the Participant's death shall be the final monthly benefit for
the DROP participation. In addition, the DROP participant's survivor shall be eligible to
receive the retirement system death benefits normally payable in the event of the death of
retired people.

(J)

Eligibility of Other Benefits - In accordance with the provisions of the Act No. 44 of
2009, 53 P.S. §895.\ IOI - 895.\ 131, a DROP participant shall be eligible for all preretirement benefits for employees provided by law, including but not limited to the
Workers' Compensation Act, Public Safety Officers' Benefit Act of 1976, etc.

(K)

Amendment - Any amendments to the DROP Ordinance shall be consistent with the
provisions covering deferred retirement option plans set forth in any applicable collective
bargaining agreement or state or federal law.

(L)

Member Financial Responsibilitv - All out of pocket expenses, costs and fees
associated with the DROP program shall be the exclusive financial responsibility of the
Member and/or the Wage and Policy Unit of the Leetsdale Borough Police Department.

ARTICLE 11 -TRAINING
for all non-mandatory training seminars and courses approved by the Chiet~ Mayor and
Police Committee Chairman which an officer attends, his compensation shall be based on a full
clay rate of eight (8) hours at the regular rate of pay.

ARTICLE 12 - MINOR ,JUDICIARY

Any police officer will be paid a minimum of two (2) hours at the rate of one and onehalf times his or her regular hourly rate or pay for local or minor judiciary hearings he or she is
required to attend when off duty. In the event his or her attendance shall be required for more
then two (2) hours, he or she will be paid for the total number of hours in attendance.
ARTICLE 13 - COUNTY COURT

Any officer that attends a Pretrial, Trial or Appeal at the Common Pleas Court level shall
be paid at the rate of one and one-half times his regular hourly rate of pay with a two (2) hour
minimum. In addition, the officer will be reimbursed for parking expense upon presentation of a
receipt from the parking garage/lot.
ARTICLE 14 - VEHICLES

The Borough agrees to provide safe vehicles for the use of the Police Department. The
determination of a safe vehicle shall be arrived at jointly between the Chief of Police, Borough
Council and Mayor. Protective screening, flares, etc. shall be maintained as part of the operating
function of the vehicle.
ARTICLE 15 - MEDICAL INSURANCE

A.

During the term of this Agreement the Borough shall provide all full-time officers

and their families the costs of the medical insurance coverage through Beacon/United Health
Care; Blue Shield High Option Dental and Vision Service Plan. The parties agree that the
Borough may substitute an equal or better health insurance coverage so long as it does not result
in any additional costs to the Police Officers.

13.

Officers shall be financially responsible to contribute to their health insurance on

a per payroll basis as follows:
$50.00 per pay
$60.00 per pay
$65.00 per pay
$75.00 per pay
$80.00 per pay
C.

2018
2019
2020
2021
2022

Medical Insurance Opt-Out Incentive

I. Officers choosing not to participate

111

the Borough provided medical

insurance for themselves and their families ("opt-out election") shall be
eligible to receive a $200.00 per month incentive.

Proof of individual or

family health insurance coverage must be presented.
2. Officers must make the opt-out election (1) annually, (2) prior to or during the
annual open enrollment period for medical insurance and (3) present proof of
individual or family health insurance coverage. The annual open enrollment
period will be communicated to all eligible officers at least two (2) vveeks
prior to the enrollment period closing.
3.

Once an Officer makes the opt-out election, he/she may not subsequently be
added to the medical insurance policy until the next annual open enrollment
period, unless expressly permitted by the Borough.

4. In the event of a new hire or change to full-time status outside of the annual
open enrollment period, such Officer shall be permitted to make the opt-out
election for that portion of the year remaining until the next annual open
enrollment period. Proof of individual or family health insurance coverage
must be presented.

5. This incentive shall be paid in one (I) lump sum payment in January of the
subsequent calendar year. Officers who have elected the opt-out incentive for
twelve (12) months shall receive a lump sum payment of $2,400.00. Officers
whose opt-out election covers less than tvvelvc (12) months shall receive a
pro-rata lump sum payment based upon $200/month.
6. The Borough has the right to periodically request updated proof of medical
insurance as a condition for continued participation in the opt-out incentive
program.
D. Extended LODD Benefits

1. In the event of an officers death in the line of duty; family, spouse or
dependents already covered by the provided health insurance benefits will have
continued coverage for (1) calendar year from the LODD. If extended coverage can
not be provided by the cmTent insurance carrier an outside policy can be provided by
the borough.

ARTICLE 16 - HOLIDAY, PERSONAL DAYS & SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL
A.

PAID HOLIDAYS:The Police will be entitled to tvvelve(12) paid holidays in each

calendar year, namely, New Year's Day, Presidents Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day, fourth of
July, Labor Day, Columbus Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve, Christmas and
New Year's Eve.
I.

If a holiday falls on an Officer's scheduled workday, the holiday hours \\'Orked

will be treated as base rate time and one-half (1/2) and as a regular work day in that pay period.
Payment for holidays shall be made during the pay period in which the holiday occurs.

2.

If a holiday falls on an Officer's clay off, he will receive eight (8) hours base rate

pay for that holiday in the pay period in \vhich it falls.
3.

All hours worked on a holiday will be paid at double time and one-half.

4.

In addition, an unworkccl holiday will not be considered when computing

overtime benefits. (l'or example, if an ofiicer works five (5) clays and a holiday constituted the
6th clay and is not worked, the officer received straight pay for forty (40) hours and, eight (8)
hours straight pay for the holiday).

B.

PERSONAL DAYS: Each full-time officer shall be entitled to four (4) personal

clays per year. Officers are required to give at least two (2) hours notice for personal clays.
C.

SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL:

Each full-time officer shall be entitled to a shift

differential premium equivalent of $.60 per hour on the 3:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. shift and $.70
per hour on the 11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. shift. The shill differential premium applies only to
normal routine shift assignments and is not applicable to extra or special details.
ARTICLE 17 · FALSE ARREST INSURANCE

The Borough shall provide raise Arrest Insurance for each police officer covered by this
Agreement. The amount shall be determined by the Council of the Borough of Lcctsclalc and the
Unit shall be given a copy of such policy.
ARTICLE 18 · EXTRA DUTY

If and when an oflicer (excluding the Chic!) is called out of duty for a period of time not
adjoining his schedule duty hours, he will be paid a minimum of two (2) hours at one and onehalftimes his regular rate of pay.

ARTICLE 19 - BEREAVEMENT

In the event of death in the immediate family, a maximum of four (4) working days pay
for absence from work shall be paid for the following: employee' s spouse, mother, father, stepmother,

step-father,

mother-in-law,

father-in-law,

children,

brother,

sister,

grandparents,

brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law.

ARTICLE 20 - PRISONER TRANSPORT
Police officers shall not be required to transport a prisoner in a police vehicle without the
presence of another police officer or constable.

ARTICLE 21 -GRIEVANCES
Attached hereto and made a part hereof is a document marked Exhibit "J\" which
constitutes the Grievance Procedure that has been agreed upon by the parties.

ARTICLE 22 - F.L.S.A.

The parties agree that they shall be specifically bound by all of the terms, conditions and
provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act generally, and especially as it may apply to the
scheduling of work, work shifts, and work hours.
ARTICLE 23- PAST PRACTICES

All other benefits, terms and conditions of employment not specifically changed herein
shall continue unchanged and in full force and effect.
ARTICLE 24 - UNION SECURITY/FAIR SHARE

The parties agree to commence negotiations within sixty (60) days for implementation of
an addendum to the within Agreement which provides for collection of fair share fees and union
dues.
ARTICLE 25 - SEVERABILITY

In the event any provision of this Agreement or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is found to be invalid or in conflict with any applicable law, that provision shall be
of no farther force and effect, but the remainder of the Agreement shall remain in full force and
effect. The Provisions of this agreement are hereby declared to be severable. In the event a
provision of the Agreement is found to be invalid and therefore severed, an immediate meeting
between the Unit and the Borough shall take place to arrive at an alternative remedy. No changes
to this Agreement may be made without the express written consent of both parties.
ARTICLE 26 - VOTING

Full time police officers have negotiated the terms of this Agreement for themselves and
part-time officers. The part-time officers do not have the right to vote on this Agreement.

ARTICLE 27 - PREVIOUS ADDENDUMS
The following Addendum's that were previously executed by the parties are hereby
incorporated by reference thereto:
a. Special Traffic Detail.

ARTICLE 28- POLICE BILL OF RIGHTS
I.

When an anonymous complaint is made against a police officer and no

corroborative evidence is obtained, the complaint shall be classified as unfounded.
2

When any citizen complaint is filed greater than ninety (90) calendar clays after

the date of the alleged event complained of, vvhich if true, could not lead to a criminal charge,
such complaint shall be classified as unfounded and the accused employee shall not be required
to submit a written report, but he shall be notified orally or in writing of such claim.

3.

A police officer, whether a subject or witness, must be informed of the nature of

complaint and questioning at the onset of the investigation.
4.

If the questioned police officer writes a written statement, a transcript is taken, or

mechanical record made, a copy of it must be given to the officer, without cost, upon request.
5.

If any police officer under investigation is under arrest, or is likely to be placed

under arrest as a result of the investigation, he shall be completely informed of all his rights prior
to the commencement of the investigation.

ARTICLE 29 - MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Except as otherwise expressly provided herein, this Agreement shall not be deemed or
construed as effecting or limiting the applicability of any and all existing statutory provisions
respecting the duties, powers, terms, conditions and employment of policemen in Pennsylvania
Boroughs. rurthcrmorc, this Agreement shall not be deemed or construed as a limitation upon

the rights and duties of the elected Borough officials and their duly appointed delegates to
manage and direct the operations and personnel of its Police Department including, without
limitation except as prescribed by Acts of the General Assembly; the formulation and execution
of policies, hiring, promotion, lay-off'. recall, retirement, discharge, supervision or discipline of
all personnel; the changing of job classifications; the scheduling of days and hours of work; the
assignment of new and additional duties; and the making and enforcement of such lawful rules
and regulations with respect to the work and conduct of Borough policemen as they deem
necessary or appropriate in consideration of the public's interest.

!INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK!

IN WITNESS WHEREOr, the parties have hereunto set their hands and seals on the date first

written above.
ATTEST:

BOROUGH OF LEETSDALE

ATTEST:

WAGE AND POLICY UNIT Of THE
BOROUGH or LEETSDALE POLICE
DEPARTMENT

