AGREEMENT

NEGOTIATING COMMITTEE OF THE 0’ HARA TOWNSHIP POLICE

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE, COUNTY OF ALLEGHENY LODGE NO. 91

AND

TOWNSHIP OF O' HARA

Effective January 1, 2018

through December 31, 2021
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
Preamble  ....cct554.... 20H... cee eieeREIEE oeolbeeeatbeerssnserercbes tah edtpeedtieoriiveneesn ees 1
Article I Union Recognition wus csssssscescesscerescsrsessrscssonsssescarsensseetenssesers 1
Article I Responsibility of the Parties ...0......:.cssssscssssseeesscsssssscenssatseeesessves 3
Article Il Compensation 20.0... ccseeesssssesssessssessssasurssseeassesesenseesesestesssasssensees 4
Articlel¥V = Hours of Work and Overtime ...........cssccccseesecessceceesecesenneeteeenentenene 6
Article V SOMLOLICy ss riick i ceeestbeseseneen aes eieeee de Sb AGE EE SG 7
Article VI Holt ayS .veig.sitsees cag espheatessitsis cesesseeseesersenedeniinne oSbesGetedtgh tutti SiSitiese 9
Article VT Vacations 00.0... ccssssessssssecsssssessssceessrsesessenessessnesstssceussatsrsesseases 10
Article VITT = Family Medical Emergencies............c.ccccsssesssessscosssesssestrsesesreees 12
Asticle IX = Health and Life Insurance .0...........ecccssessscessssseseseseeseseseneatseeeroeeeee 12
Article X POMSiOms ii... cites. 0000 cdbs Foes ecdpeecneceees AST TE HATER RORTATI ERT ce Peon 15
Article XT Leave of ADSOnCEe oo... seesecescsessesessesesconsaneesseseneaerereseanesersesnssentesees 17
Article X11 Bereavement Pay 00.0... eeesccnssessesstenssenseseseesseasscnssnssuratsrsssvsesess 18
Article XT] = Grievance Procedure .........cccccesessscssssssscscescsssesececsssscsensseseonerreseees 19
Article XIV Uniforms and Equipment ..............cssssssesreresseseesesens Se eee 21
Article KV Veterans yy........scssessaidicccesstnennsacsccensesssssseieiebeeseentiensii iginieurivasestibenenti 22
Article XVI Miscellaneous Provisions ...0......ccccccccecsteecneescseeeseseeesssneeeseaeenesens 22
Article XVIT Duration and Termination ...........:cccccccssssscsscsccesssressnestesseseatecersss 24

Attachment Officers Bill of Rights .....0.....cccccsscsssessensnssssesseessnsueseeagegessereaseees i
AGREEMENT

Made and entered into between O’Hara Township, Pennsylvania, it Successors and Assigns,
hereinafter referred to as the “Township”, and the Negotiating Committee of the O’Hara Township Police,

Fratemal Order of Police, County of Allegheny Lodge No. 91, hereinafter referred to as the “Union”.

WITNESSETH:

WHEREAS, the parties hereto are desirous of entering upon an Agreement as to wage rates, hours,

and other conditions of employment;

NOW, THEREFORE, the Township and the Union acting by and through their duly authorized

agents hereby agree as follows:

ARTICLE]

UNION RECOGNITION

1. The Township hereby recognizes FOP Lodge No. 91 as the sole and exclusive collective
bargaining representative for all of its Police Officers within the bargaining unit with respect to compensation,
hours of work, working conditions and other terms and conditions of employment. The bargaining unit as
certified by the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Board (Case #PF-R-090-58-W) shall consist of all full-time and all
part-time Police Officers of the Township Police Department, but shall not include the Chief/Superintendent of

Police.
2, The Township recognizes the right of the FOP to designate its Job Advocate and/or alternates. The
authority of the Job Advocate and/or alternates by the FOP shall be limited and shall not exceed the following
duties and activities:

a. Investigation, process and presentation of grievances and or unfair labor
practices in accordance with the provisions of the Collective Bargaining Agreement and
other work related issues; and

b. The transmission of such messages and information which shall originate
with and are authorized by the FOP or its officers, provided such messages and information
have been reduced to writing, or if not reduced to writing, are of a routine nature and do
not involve work stoppage, slowdowns or refusal to obey orders, or any other interference

with the Township’s business.

3. Dues Check-Off:

a. The Township agrees to deduct monthly FOP dues, that being two (2) times
the Officer’s standard hourly rate, from each Officer of the bargaining unit and to send
such dues to the FOP on or before the tenth (10") of the following month.

b. The FOP agrees to indemnify and save the Township harmless from any
and all claims, suits or other forms of liability arising out of deductions of money for FOP
dues under this Article, or arising from any action or inaction taken by the Township

pursuant to the provision of this section.
ARTICLE H

RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PARTIES

1. The Township retains the exclusive right to manage the Township, including but not limited to the
rights to decide the number and location of offices, the method and place of operation, the schedules of operation
and the process of operation, to maintain order and efficiency in its operation, to hire, layoff, assign, transfer, and
promote employees, and to determine the starting and quitting time and the number of hours to be worked, subject
only to such regulations and restrictions governing the exercise of these rights as are expressly provided in this

Agreement.

2, Work rules which may from time to time be instituted by the Township will be posted before being
placed in effect. The administration and application of the work rules as they affect this Agreement are subject

to the grievance procedure.

3. The Union agrees that during the terms of this Agreement, it will not authorize, instigate, condone,
or engage in a deliberate work stoppage, interruption, strike, sympathy strike, slowdown or other interruption of

work.

4. The Township agrees that during the same period, there shall be no lockouts.
ARTICLE II

COMPENSATION

[2 Base Annual Salary Schedule
The Sergeant’s rate of pay wilt be maintained 5% higher than the highest Patrol step. All Officers

shall be compensated in accordance with the following schedule effective January 1 of each year:

 

2018 2018 2019 2019 2020 2020 2021 2021
RANK Hourly Base Hourly Base Hourly Base Hourly Base
Sergeant 346.11 | $95,911 | $47.26 | $98,309 | $48.56 | $101,012 | $49.78 { $103,538

 

 

| Patrol after 6 yrs. Of Service | $43.92 | $91,344 | $45.01 | $93,628 | $46.25 | $96,202 | $47.41 | $ 98,607

 

Patrol after 5 yrs. Of Service | $41.58 | $86,492 | $42.62 | $88,655 | $43.79 | $91,093 | $44.89 | § 93,370

 

Patrol afier 4 yrs. Of Service | $39.25 | $81,641 | $40.23 | $83,682 | $41.34 | $85,983 | $42.37 | $ 88,133

 

Patrol after 3 yrs. Of Service | $36.92 | $76,790 | $37.84 | $78,709 | $38.88 | $80,874 | $39.85 | $ 82,896

 

Patrol after 2 yrs. Of Service | $34.58 | $71,917 | $35.44 | $73,715 | $36.41 | $75,742 | $37.32 |$ 77,635

 

Patrol after 1 yr. of Service | $32.25 | $67,087 | $33.06 | $68,764 | $33.97 | $70,655 | $34.82 | $ 72,421

 

Patrol < 1 yr. of Service $29.92 | $62,235 | $30.67 | $63,791 | $31.51 | $65,545 | $32.30 | $ 67,184

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2. Longevity Rate

Effective January 1, 2018 through December 31, 2021, longevity will increase $75.00 in 2018;
$100.00 in 2019, 2020 and 2021,

 

 

 

 

 

Longevity 2018 2019 2020 2021
6 ~— 10 years $1,230 $1,330 $1,430 $1,530
11-15 years $1,310 $1,410 $1,510 $1,610
16 — 20 years $1,380 $1,480 $1,530 $1,680
Over 21 years $1,450 $1,550 $1,650 $1,750

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
3. When neither the Superintendent, Captain, or Sergeant are scheduled for duty, the Township shall
pay a Shift Commander on duty, as designated by the Superintendent, an additional wage of one dollar and five
cents ($1.05) per hour for the shift. For those Officers who obtain a Supervisory Training Certification in Law
Enforcement, an additional twenty dollars ($20.00) per month shall be paid. Patrol Officers who are designated
as Shift Commander and decline the responsibility shall not be entitled to the $20.00 for the month in which the
responsibility was refused. The Township shall develop a curriculum profile that will meet the requirements of a
Shift Supervisor in conjunction with local university or police training agencies. The Juvenile Officer, as
designated by the Superintendent, shall receive an extra twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month. Officers shall
receive an additional twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month for an EMT Training Certification or an Associate

Degree in Police Training. Officers shall receive an additional forty dollars ($40.00) per month for a Bachelor

Degree in Police Training.

4. Off-Duty Time in Court: Any Police Officer required to appear by legal subpoena, at any legal
proceeding other than the local District Justice, during off-duty hours pursuant to his duties shall be guaranteed a
minimum of four (4) hours work paid at the rate of time and one-half their regular hourly rate.

Police Officers will be paid at the rate of time and one-half their regular hourly rate for all appearances in
court during off-duty hours. Payment for appearances at the District Magistrate court will be a minimum of one
and one half hour (1-1/2) at one and one-half times their regular hourly rate. Payment for all other courts other
than the District Magistrate will include travel time to and from the municipal building to the court. For all court
appearances, the Officer will obtain verification from the court concerning the actual time spent at the court. Any
witness fees paid to the Officer in connection with any court appearance wil! be tumed over to the Township.

The Township will reimburse a Police Officer for parking fees up to a maximum of $15.00 per day.

5. Training Certification: All Police Officers will be required to complete First Responders training

and maintain such certification. The Township will pay for training and maintenance training for the
5
Certification. The Township will pay to maintain an Officer's EMT certification if the Officer wishes. The EMT

Certification fulfills the requirement for First Responders Training and Certification.

ARTICLE FV

HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME

1. This Article defines the norma! hours of work and the basis for the calculation of overtime and
shall not be construed as a guarantee of hours worked per day or per week. No split shifts shall be worked unless

in the case of emergency or agreed to by both parties.

2. The normal workweek shall consist of five (5) consecutive days of eight (8) hours each. Normal
shift schedule shall be 7 - 3,3 - 11, 11 - 7. However, this provision shall not be construed as a limitation on the
hours any employee may be cailed upon to work. Except as stated under Paragraph 3 of Article V - Seniority,
the work schedule for a Sergeant and any other ranking Officer shall be determined by the Police Superintendent
as it may deem necessary. It is recognized that there are occasions when additional working times must be
scheduled, and it is agreed that Management shall determine the number of hours to be so worked. For purposes

of this Agreement, the workweek shall begin at 12:01 A.M. Sunday; and a 24-hour day shall be from 12:01 A.M.
- 12:00 A.M.

4

3. If an employee works over eight (8) hours per day, or any hours which are not part of his regular
schedule, he shall not be required to lose time to avoid the payment of overtime, provided there is work available

for which he would have been regularly scheduled.

4, Overtime shall be divided among the Employees within a classification as equally as possible, with

the Employee working the job on which the overtime occurs being given the first chance to work.
5. Time and one-half the regular straight time rate will be paid for all hours worked in excess of eight

(8) hours per day or forty (40) hours in any one (1) week.

6. Employees who are called out for extra duty will receive a minimum of three (3) hours at the

applicable rate of pay. The Township reserves the right to require the Employee to work the entire three (3) hours.

ARTICLE V
SENIORITY
l. Seniority is based upon the length of continuous service with the Township as a Police Officer.
z An Employee’s seniority shail terminate for any of the following reasons:
A. Discharge for just cause;
B. Voluntary quit;
Cc. Absence from work for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months;
D. Absence from work without reporting for three (3) consecutive days;
E. Failure to contact the Township or its representative within three (3) days after notice to
report, and failure to report for work within one (1) week after notice of recall;
F, Total and permanent disability, as defined in the Township Police pension plan;
G. Failure to return to work at the expiration of Leave of Absence; and
H. Retirement.
3. Whenever practicable, seniority shall govern Police Officers’ days off per normal workweek. This

provision shall include the Sergeant’s position provided that Shift Commanders are assigned duty during all three

(3) shifts on the Sergeant’s days off. Pass days for Sergeants shall be posted and bid separately from other Police

7
Officers. If a Police Officer selects his days off by seniority, such rights can be exercised only once in any
consecutive twelve (12) month period. Such a request must be made during the period from November 1 to
November 15 for the following calendar year. No assignment shall be made for disciplinary reasons. Vacation

and Holiday picks may begin after shift picks are complete.

4, Under normal circumstances, full-time Police Officers will select their preferred shifts for the next
calendar year, on the basis of seniority. Shift selection will normally occur between November 1 and November
15 for the next year. The Superintendent of Police shall make all shift assignments for ranking Officers who will
not be entitled to select their shifts on the basis of seniority. The Township, through the Superintendent of Police,
shall make the final decision concerning matters relating to shift scheduling or assignments. Accordingly, the
Township shall have the authority to establish work schedules, to make shift assignments, to change schedules
and to change shift assignments whenever it is in the best interest of the Township to do so, based upon the
discretion or opinion of the Superintendent of Police. For example, the Superintendent of Police shall have the
authority to change schedules and shift assignments in order to avoid overtime, whenever a Police Officer is off
work for pass days or as a result of sickness or disability, to handle special events or circumstances, and in cases
of emergency. Under no circumstances will the scheduling of shifts based upon seniority cause any additional

overtime to the Township.

5. In the event that an Officer is bumped from a scheduled shift to another shift at the direction of
Management without 24-hour notice and that bump will not result in overtime that Officer will be paid a shift

differential of $0.50 per hour,
ARTICLE VI

HOLIDAYS

I. All Holidays must be scheduled by April 15". Employees who satisfy the eligibility requirements
shall receive Holiday Pay for each of fourteen (14) approved holidays not worked to be paid at eight (8) hours
straight time at their regular hourly rate. Selection shall be made according to seniority with each Police Officer

selecting two (2) holidays in each round.

2. Officers hired after January 1, 1999 shal! earn one Holiday at 22 years of service, and one Holiday

at 25 years of service.

3. Probationary employees shall not be entitled to holidays during the probationary period. For
employees hired after January 1, , upon completion of the probationary period, a Police Officer shall be
ployees hired after January 1, 2005, up pletion of the probationary period, a Police Offi hall b

entitled to a prorated number of holidays for the remainder of the calendar year, rounded up io the next full day.

4, An employee must work the full shift on his last regularly scheduled shift immediately prior to the
holiday and the full shift on his regularly scheduled shift next succeeding the holiday or provide a physician’s

certificate in order to receive holiday pay.

5. One Officer can take a Holiday with other Officers who are on scheduled vacation time. Other
Officers can be off utilizing Holiday time as long as it does not cause overtime or no unwanted shift changes

unless required by the Township Manager due to unforeseen circumstances.
ARTICLE VII

VACATIONS

1. Each Employee shall be entitled to a vacation with pay during each calendar year if at any time
while he is working between January | and December 31, inclusive, he has completed one (1) or more years of

continuous service and he complies with the conditions of Section 8 of this article.

Z, For employees hired before January 1, 1999, the vacation schedule is as shown in the following
table:
Completed Years of Service as of December 31 Vacation Time
1 year 2 weeks
6 years 3 weeks
13 years 4 weeks
20 years 5 weeks
25 years 6 weeks

3. As of January 1, 2014, full-time Police Officers hired after January 1, 1999, shall be covered by

the following vacation schedule:

Completed years of service as of December 31 Vacation Time
1 year 2 weeks
6 years 3 weeks
13 years 4 weeks
20 years 5 weeks
4. Employees shall be required to take their vacation in minimum units of one (1) week each.
Selections for vacation the following year shall be made upon completion of shift selections. Selection of vacation
periods by Police Officers will so far as practicable be granted at time most desired by the Employees with the
longest service; Employees being given preference as to choice. The procedure for selection shall be that each
Police Officer shall select up to two (2) weeks in each round. Ifa Police Officer has selected a vacation outside
the United States of America or over a distance of one thousand (1,000) miles, he shall be entitled to take three
(3) weeks of vacation at one time. Only two (2) Police Officers shall be permitted to take vacations during the

same weekly period.

5. The Township shall schedule vacations to begin and end on the Police Officer’s regular days off,

if any.

6. Vacations shall be scheduled on a calendar year basis and may not be carried forward into future

calendar years.

7. Probationary employees shall not be entitled to vacation during the probationary period. For
employees hired after January 1, 2005, upon completion of the probationary period, a Police Officer shall be
entitled to a prorated number of vacation days for the remainder of the calendar year, rounded up to the next full

day.

8. Proration of Vacation Time: Employees who miss more than one hundred sixty-five (165) days of
work in a given calendar year excluding vacation, holidays, sick days and PTO days, shall have their vacation
entitlement for the following calendar year reduced based on the percentage of days missed in proportion to total
work days in a calendar year. Example: 150 work days missed in a calendar year out of 260 total work days; 58%

of 15 vacation days represents 9 days reduction leaving a balance of 6 vacation days for the following year. Any
11
time off because of a work related injury shall be considered as time worked at the rate of eight (8) hours per day

or forty (40) hours per week.

ARTICLE VII

FAMILY MEDICAL EMERGENCIES

1. The Superintendent of Police, Sergeant, Officer in Charge or the Township Manager must be
notified immediately of the family medical emergency. The Superintendent or Manager must grant approval for
time off for the emergency. A family member under this agreement includes parent, spouse’s parent, child or
stepchild, spouse, grandparent or spouse’s grandparent. A medical emergency is defined as an event that requires

immediate medical attention from a healthcare provider. Doctor appointments are not covered under this policy.

In the event of a family medical emergency, Officers shall not be permitted to use sick time for time off
as per current policy. However, Officers will be permitted to change previously scheduled and/or unused accrued
time off (i.e. vacation, holidays and PTO) for a family emergency. In the event a family emergency occurs and
an Officer does not have any unused accrued time available the Township would agree to work with the Officer

in obtaining time off without loss of pay to attend to that emergency.

ARTICLE IX

HEALTH AND LIFE INSURANCE

1, Current insurance benefits shall be as set forth and provided by the Township as follows:
A. Currently the Township‘s Health Insurance plan is PPO Blue $10. This will continue to

be the Township plan as long as it is offered.
All full-time employees shall pay 5% of the applicable monthly premium, by payroll deduction, for the

health insurance plan, dental coverage and vision coverage under this Article, including any successors to the

subject plans.

The above employee contributions to health insurance will be paid on a pre-tax basis utilizing a Section

125 plan. Accordingly, based upon current law, these health insurance contributions will be treated as a pre-tax

item, thereby reducing federal, FICA, Pennsylvania and local taxes.

Health Care Re-Opener: In the event that Highmark and UPMC do not reach an agreement concerning

health care coverage resulting in a change in benefit coverage under the current Health Care Plan for employees

and their beneficiaries, both the FOP Lodge #91, as an agent for the Police, and Township agree to re-open the

contract to negotiate health care coverage.

B.

As of January 1, 2014 the Township will offer the Concordia High Option Dental Plan,
consistent with other Township employees, as long as the carrier and plan continue to be
available. In the event the carrier and/or plan are not available, the Township wil! provide
an equivalent dental plan as the case may be, for the Employee and his dependents to be
paid by the Township;

(1) — Optional supplemental denta! coverage shall be available to Police Officers through

AFLAC. Said dental plan premiums shall be paid by the Police Officer.

The Township will continue to offer the basic Vision Benefits of America Vision Care Plan
as long as the carrier and plan continue to be available. In the event the carrier and/or plan
are not available, the Township will provide an equivalent vision plan as the case may be

for the Employee and his dependents to be paid by the Township;

A term life insurance policy of $50,000; Double Indemnity;
False arrest liability coverage of one hundred and fifty thousand dollars ($150,000);

The Township agrees to provide eligible employees with the current disability insurance
13
plan for non-job related accidents and illnesses. Coverage will be provided for up to 260
weeks for accidents and up to 104 weeks for sickness with a weekly benefit equal to sixty-
six and two thirds percent (66-2/3%) of the employee's base wage for a forty (40) hour
work week. Benefits shall begin on the first day of disability for an accident and on the
eighth day of disability for an illness.

G. Upon retirement, each Police Officer shall be provided with a five thousand ($5,000)
single-premium life insurance policy. The Township shall have the option of self-insuring
this benefit by paying the Officer’s designated beneficiary or estate the amount of $5,000
upon the death of the Officer. If a policy is provided, said retired Employee shall be
privileged to designate his/her beneficiary. The aforesaid five thousand dollar ($5,000)
single premium life insurance policy shall be substituted for the fifty thousand dollar
($50,000) life insurance policy upon retirement of the employee.

H. During the term of this Agreement, the Township will provide accidental death and

dismemberment (“AD&D”) coverage for cach regular, full time Police Officer in the
amount of $50,000. In the event of death via an off duty accident, both life insurance and

AD&D coverage are in place.

2. The Township shall have the right to select the insurance carrier and the plan of its choice or to
provide self-insurance so long as coverage is at least comparable to that provided in the current policy
agreements, as listed previously, provided that the amount of the employee’s contribution to health insurance
coverage, as set forth in Article IX Section 1(A) above, will not be increased as a result of the change in the

carrier or plan.

3. If during the term of this Agreement there shall become effective any compulsory state or federal

system or employee group health insurance financed by compulsory contributions from employers, which results
14
in the additional cost to the Township of health insurance for employees than already provided for herein, the
Township and the Union agree that such conditions will automatically result in the re-opening of negotiations for
health and welfare benefits provided to the employees under this Article. Under such circumstances, the

Township and the Union shall review and negotiate such new health and welfare benefits for employees.

4, Only regular, full-time Police Officers shall be eligible to receive benefits under this Article.

5. if an employee elects to forego health insurance coverage, including hospitalization, vision and
dental coverage, the Township can buy out the employee’s coverage at a cost of $4,000 annually. The payment
will be made at the end of the year in question, on or about December 1. The employee will have the option of
reinstating benefits once each year in January with at least forty-five (45) days advance written notice to the
Township; or, if the employee’s spouse dies, is terminated from health care coverage, or divorces, and such
occurrences leave the employee without available health care benefits. Should an employee elect to forego health
care coverage provided by the Township, the employee shall execute a release form provided by the Township
opting to forego such coverage. This option of foregoing health insurance coverage shall only be made available
to the employee should the Township’s insurance carriers not require one hundred (100%) employee participation

under insurance policies.

ARTICLE X

PENSIONS

1. The Township has established a pension plan of which the following is a summary of the benefits
for the Employees covered hereunder:
A. Any Employee, who was hired before January 1, 1999, having twenty-five (25) years of

service and having attained the age of fifty (50) years may retire at fifty-three percent (53%)
15
of his average salary, computed as the average of his salary for the three (3) previous years
prior to his retirement. For all full-time Police Officers hired after January 1, 1999, the
retirement benefit will be 50% of final average salary, At no time will pension benefits
hereunder be reduced by the Employee’s Social Security benefits during the term of this
contract, except that the disability pension benefits shall be offset by the amount of benefits

received for the same injuries under the Social Security Act.

B. The Township agrees to provide full vesting under paid pension plan after twelve (12) years
of service.
Cc. The Township agrees to provide a service increment for the pension plan of $15.00 per

month for every full year worked after 25 ycars of service. The increment is maxed out at

30 years of service.

D. The Township agrees to a widow’s benefit, as authorized by Act 600, (50% of member’s
benefit) subject to the following:
1. An actuarial study that establishes that said widow’s benefit will not

cause a negative actuarial impact to the Plan;

2. Said benefit will not result in any cost to the Township’s general
fund; and
3. Eliminate 10 years certain period, which is not authorized by Act
600.
2. These benefits are subject to the completion of an actuarial report deeming the plan sound and in

compliance with the terms of the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act (Act 205).

16
3. The current D.R.O.P. Pension Language and Ordinance provision created and agreed upon in

2008 is appended to and part of this collective bargaining agreement.

ARTICLE XI

LEAVE OF ABSENCE

1. The Township agrees to grant Employees a leave of absence without pay for specifically defined
reasons. Any Employee desiring a leave of absence from his employment shall secure written permission from
the Township Manager. The maximum leave of absence shall be for ninety (90) days. During the period of
absence, the Employee shall not engage in any gainful employment of similar nature as employed by the
Township. Failure to comply with this provision shall result in complete loss of seniority rights for the Employee

involved. The Employee must make suitable arrangements for continuation of applicable insurance benefits

before the leave may be approved.

2. Sick Leave: Each regular full-time Police Officer may receive up to ten (10) days paid sick leave
per year. Each newly hired Police Officer is entitled to 2.5 sick days per quarter worked (during the probationary
period) in the first calendar year of service. Police Officers who submit proof of participation in a voluntary
employee wellness program may accumulate a total of seventy-five (75) sick days. Police Officers who do not
participate in a voluntary employee wellness program, or do not submit proof of participation in a voluntary
employee wellness program may accumulate a total of sixty-five (65) sick days. In the event a Police Officer is
hospitalized as an in-patient, he/she shall be entitled to additional sick leave for the duration of the hospitalization,
not to exceed five (5) days additional days paid sick leave. (Example: Ifa Police Officer is hospitalized for one
day as in inpatient, he/she receives one additional sick day.) Ifa Police Officer is absent for three (3) consecutive
days or longer due to illness, he/she shall be required to furnish a medical certificate. When a Police Officer

becomes sick during his/her shift, he/she shall be charged as follows:
17
l. If he/she works less than 2 hours 8 hours sick leave (0 hours wages)

2: If he/she works between 2 hours and 4 hours sick leave (4 hours wages)
6 hours
3, If he/she works more than 6 hours 0 hours sick leave (8 hours wages)
3. Unused Sick Leave: Any sick leave not used will be paid at one-half (1/2) pay with settlement

annually. Sick leave in excess of the maximum may also be turned in for a Holiday. The trade-in rate will be 1.5

sick days for one (1) Holiday, with a maximum of three (3) Holidays allowed annually.

4. Personal Time Off: Three sick days will be permitted to be utilized as Personal Time Off. These
days will not be allowed to be utilized consecutively, except for a family medical emergency as outlined in Article
VIIL The PTO time must be prescheduled one day prior to use. These will be on an annual use-or-lose basis. If
not used, the days will be converted to Sick Days for carry over purposes. These days may not be utilized on any

widely observed or national holidays.

ARTICLE XII

BEREAVEMENT PAY

An employee who is absent from his scheduled work because of a death and attendance at the funeral of
his spouse, parents, parents-in-law, children, brother or sister, or grandparents shall receive pay at his daily rate
for the time so necessarily lost, up to but not exceeding four consecutive days. This provision shall include
grandparent in-laws, step-parents and step-children. An employee who is absent from his scheduled work as set
forth above because of a death and attendance at a funeral of his aunt, uncle, niece, nephew, sister-in-law, brother-
in-law, his spouse’s aunt or his spouse’s uncle shall receive pay at his daily rate for the time so necessarily lost,

but not exceeding two (2) consecutive days.
18
ARTICLE XIII

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

1. The term “grievance” shall mean any difference or dispute between the Township and any regular
Police Officer or the Union with respect to the interpretation, application, claim, or breach or any violation of any

of the provisions of this Agreement.

2. Should a dispute concerning this Agreement arise between the Township and the Union or a Police
Officer, there shall be no suspension of work on account of such dispute, but instead, a grievance shall be filed

and settled in accordance with the grievance procedures hereinafter set forth.

A: The Grievance Committee shall consist of the FOP Board of Directors.

4. An Officer who believes that he or she is grieved shall submit a proposed grievance in a timely
manner to his/her FOP Advocate, who will review the grievance for validity/accuracy and forward the grievance
to the FOP Board of Directors, through their FOP Bargaining Representative. Once reviewed and approved for

formal submission, the FOP Advocate or grievant wil! then forward said grievance to the next step as follows:

A. The written grievance shall be forwarded to the Township Manager within ten (10)
business days from the occurrence of the grievance. Within seven (7) business days thereafter said
grievance shall be considered in a meeting by the Manager, aggrieved Officer and FOP Bargaining
Representative and/or FOP Advocate. Within seven (7) working days thereafter, a decision shall

be made by the Township and written notice shall be given to the aggrieved Officer and FOP

Advocate.

19
B. If the matter is not settled to the satisfaction of the Union, the Union shall be entitled to
arbitration as provided for herein. A written request for arbitration shall be given by the Union to

the Township Manager within ten (10) days of notification of the Township’s decision.

C. ‘The grievance as stated in the request for arbitration shall constitute the sole and entire
subject matter to be heard by the arbitrator unless the parties agree to modify the scope of the
hearing. The number of grievances which can be submitted to the arbitrator shall be limited to one

(1) grievance unless otherwise agreed to by both parties.

D. If the Township has a grievance, it shall take it to the Wage and Policy Committee; and if

not resolved to the Township’s satisfaction, the Township shall be entitled to arbitration.

E. Extension of time of each step shall be only by mutual consent of the Township and the

Union.

F. The Township shall not be obligated to pay any member of the Wage and Policy
Committee, the Chairman, and/or aggrieved Police Officer for time spent in processing grievances,

grievance meetings, or arbitration hearings.

G. The Union may, at its own expense, appoint an agent to represent the applicant in any

grievance proceedings.

H. In the event the parties have not selected an arbitrator within ten (10) days of the date of
the request for arbitration or within such period of time as may be mutually agreed upon, an
arbitrator shall be selected in accordance with the rules, regulations, and procedures of the
American Arbitration Association. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on all

parties to the extent permitted by applicable law.

20
L The arbitrator may not add to, subtract from, change, or amend any of the terms of this

Agreement and shall only concern himself with the interpretation and application of the terms of

this Agreement.

J, Each party to this Agreement, within ten (10) days (exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays) after receipt of the request for arbitration, shall appoint a representative to act with the

arbitrator in an advisory capacity and shall notify the other party in writing of such appointment.

K. All proceedings before the arbitrator shall be conducted in accordance with the voluntary

labor relation rules of the American Arbitration Association.

5. The Township and the Union agree that it is desirable to have matters of joint concern discussed

between them. Meetings may be scheduled not to exceed four (4) each year to discuss matters of mutual concern.

ARTICLE XIV

UNIFORMS AND EQUIPMENT

The Township shall provide a uniform allowance of three hundred and fifty dollars ($350) to any new
employee upon commencement of employment. Following the initial allowance, each employee shall receive an
allowance for equipment and uniform purchases and cleaning each year up to $700.00. As of January 1, 2018 the
uniform allowance will increase $25 each year of the agreement with the following schedule of allowance: 2018
- $825,00; 2019 - $850.00; 2020 - $875.00; $2021 - $900.00. The Officer must furnish a receipt to collect said
reimbursement, and it will be non-cumulative. In 2018 each Officer will receive an extra $75.00 for the purchase

of a new coat(s) in 2018.

21
ARTICLE XV

VETERANS

Any person who has left or who leaves a position with the Township to enter the Armed Forces of the
United States shall be entitled to such reemployment rights as provided in the Selective Service Act of 1948, as
amended; and if reemployed, shall be entitled to the same status as if he had worked for the Township during the

time spent in the Armed Forces of the United States.

ARTICLE XVI

MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

l. Ifany provision of this Agreement is held to be invalid, illegal, or unconstitutional, such invalidity,

illegality, or unconstitutionality shall not affect the remaining provisions of this Agreement.

2, All Employees shall furnish to the Township, in writing, a telephone number and an address where
they may be reached. Notices or communications to such number or address shall satisfy ali requirements for
notice under this Agreement. Employees who so indicate that their telephone number is unlisted shall not have

the number distributed other than to administrative personnel.

4

3. Retirement: Retiring Police Officers shall provide the Township with 30-days advance notice of

relirement.

4, Additional Education: In the event that any Police Officer is required by the Township to attend
classes pertaining to police work, the Township shall pay all expenses, including meals (up to $20 per day, with

receipts), tuition and travel, upon prior approval by the Township Manager or Superintendent of Police.

22
5. At any time when a Police Officer is authorized to use his personal automobile for Township

business, the past practice of paying mileage allowance shall continue. The mileage allowance shall be the

prevailing rate allowabie by the Internal Revenue Service.
6. The Officer’s Bill of Rights is made an attachment to this contract.

7. In the event the Township becomes the contracted police force for a neighboring community, the

Township will agree to discuss this matter with the Union.

8. The terms and conditions of this Agreement have been decided by collective bargaining as defined
in writing in the foregoing Articles, It is the intent and purpose of the parties hereto that this Agreement contains
the complete agreement between the parties. This Agreement shall not be modified in whole or in any part by

the parties except by an instrument, in writing, duly executed by both parties.

9. Agency Shop: It shall be a condition of employment that all Employees of the Employer covered
by this Agreement shall be required as a condition of continued employment either to be members of the Union
in good standing or to pay the Union a fair share fee which shall amount to the regular membership dues required
of members of the Union less the cost incurred by the Union in its previous fiscal year for activities or
undertakings which were not reasonably employed to implement or effectuate the duties of the Union as exclusive
bargaining agent of the Employees in the bargaining unit. it shall also be a condition of employment that all
Employees covered by this Agreement and hired on or after its effective date shall be required either to be
members of the Union in good standing or to pay the aforesaid fair share fee. The Union shal! provide the
Employer with the name of each non-member who is obligated to pay such fair share fee, the amount of the fee
that he or she is obligated to pay, and a reasonable schedule for deducting said amount from the salary or wages

of such non-member. The Employer shall deduct said fair share fee or union dues in accordance with the schedule
23
provided by the Union and promptly transmit the amount deducted to the Secretary/Treasurer of the Union. The
Union shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless the Township concerning any action which the Township takes

or does not take, at the request of the Union, pursuant to this Agency Shop provision.

ARTICLE XVII
DURATION AND TERMINATION

This Agreement shall continue in full force and effect to and including December 31, 2017, and from year
to year thereafter unless either party gives proper notice as herein set forth. This Agreement is deemed to be

effective at 12:01 A.M. on January 1, 2018.

ANSHIP OF O’HARA

BZLZZE a \e\ir

Robert John Sfth Date
President of Council

   
 

Fownshjp Mana yy

FRATERNAL ORDER OF POLICE
COUNTY OF ALLEGHENY LODGE NO. 91

, La DO sata

CPflice Negotiating Committee KA Dziezgowsk Date
Bargaining Representative

24
ADDENDUM

OFFICERS BILL OF RIGHTS

A. When an anonymous complaint is made against a police officer
and no corroborative evidence is obtained, the complaint shall be classified as unfounded.

B. When any citizen complaint (a) alleges facts which if true could
not lead to a criminal charge, and (b) is filed beyond the legal time limits for filing a civil
complaint on such facts, then the complaint shall be classified as unfounded, and the
accused police officer shall not be required to submit a written report, but he shall be
notified orally or in writing of such claim.

C. A police officer, whether a subject or witness, must be informed of
the nature of the interrogation at the outset of the interrogation.

D. If the interrogated police officer writes a written statement, a
transcript is taken, or mechanical or electronic record is made, a copy of same must be
piven to the interrogated police officer, without cost, upon request.

Es If any police officer under interrogation is under arrest, or is likely
to be placed under arrest as a result of the interrogation, he shall be completely informed
of all his rights prior to the commencement of the interrogation.

F. At the request of any police officer under interrogation, he/she
shall have the right to be represented by counsel of his choice and/or an F.O.P.
representative who shall be present at all times during the interrogation. The

interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonable time until representation can be

obtained.
G. A police officer called to a meeting for questioning which the
police officer reasonably believes is for the purpose of determining whether he should be
disciplined or discharged is entitled to have a representative designated by the Fraternal
Order of Police, Lodge #91, present during questioning. A representative must be
available at a reasonable time of the hour set for questioning. The time spent at such
meeting by the officer shall be time worked under the terms of this Agreement.

H. The specific reasons for discipline or discharge should not
normally be the subject of public comment by the Township without the consent of the

police officer.
