BEFORE MUNICIPAL COUNCIL OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF MONROEVILLE

AN ORDINANCE OF THE MUNICIPALITY OF )
MONROEVILLE AUTHORIZING THE PROPER _ )

OFFICIALS OF MONROEVILLE TO ENTER INTO )

A COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT ) ORDINANCE NO. 2715
WITH THE POLICE DEPARTMENT WAGE )

POLICY COMMITTEE OF THE MUNICIPALITY _ )

OF MONROEVILLE )

BE IT ORDAINED AND ENACTED by the Municipality of Monroeville, in Council
assembled as follows:

SECTION 1. The proper officials of the Municipality of Monroeville are hereby
authorized to enter a Collective Bargaining Agreement with the Police Department Wage Policy

Committee, said Agreement to be effective January 1, 2019.

SECTION 2. A copy of the Agreement is attached hereto, made a part hereof and
marked "Exhibit A."

ORDAINED AND ENACTED this 10th day of December, 2019.

 

 

(SEAL)

ATTEST: MUNICIPALITY OF MONROEVILLE
Cicnd: L iele/ “Dr. NicholasJ< Gresock

Municipal ie Mayor

ENTERED INTO LEGAL BOOK ON: December 20, 2019
2019-2022 LABOR AGREEMENT
BETWEEN
THE MUNICIPALITY OF MONROEVILLE
AND
MONROEVILLE POLICE DEPARTMENT
WAGE/POLICY COMMITTEE
(PF-R-86-85-W)
COVERING THE YEARS

JANUARY 1, 2019 TO DECEMBER 31, 2022

{DocNo=60457489.1 }
Ordinance
Agreement
Witnesseth
Article I,
Article IT.
Article III.

Article IV.
1.

Aa Rw

Article V.

CMAN YN

Article VI

Article VII

WN

Article VIII
1,
2.
Article IX
1.
2.
3.

(DocNo=00457489 1 }

15.4. INDEX

Recognition

Management Rights

Rights of the Wage Policy Committee and Members

of the Monroeville Police Department
Wages

Patrolman Classification

Additional Police Classification

Specialist Pay

Shift Differential

Longevity Payment

Supervisor Pay

Overtime

Overtime Work

Overtime Rate

Appropriate Hourly Rate

Overtime Scheduled By Classification

Overtime Option

Accumulated Compensatory Time

Use of Compensatory Time

Overtime Utilization Policy
Vacation

Accrued Vacation

Annual Vacation Schedule

Block Week Vacation Scheduling

Vacation Quotas

Vacation Request on a Holiday
Holidays and Personal Days

Holidays

Personal Holidays

Anniversary Date and Birthday

Holiday Pay

Special Detail on Official Holiday
Sick/Injury Leave

Sick Leave

Short Term Disability
Bereavement Leave

Immediate Family

Near Family

Other Family Members

Ah eb

woo owowonwn~la

10
10
10
10
10
11
13
13
13
14
14
14
14
14
14
15
15
15
15
15
16
17
17
17
17
Article X Additional Leave
1. Additional Leave
2. Family/Medical Leave Act

Article XI Modified Duty Work Assignment

Article XII Insurance

Health Care

Health Care Rebate Program

Life Insurance

Non-Work Related Long Term Disability Insurance

Police Professional Liability Insurance

. Reimbursement of Legal Defense Costs

Article XIII Pension Retirement

Pension Eligibility

Pension Contributions

Calculation of Pension Benefits

Service Increments

Social Security Offset

Survivor Benefits

Pension Vesting

Use of Military Service Time

Work Related Disability Pension

Health Care Benefits for Retirees and Spouse
11. Life Insurance for Retirees

Article XIV Clothing, Uniform, Equipment and Maintenance Allowance
1. Clothing, Uniform, Equipment and Maintenance

Allowance

New Hires

Extra-Ordinary Uniform Cost

Article Damage

Safety Equipment

Soft Body Armor

. Prescription Eyeglass Inserts

Article XV Court Appearance
1. Court Appearance
2. Off Duty Court Appearance Compensation
3, Court Appearance

Article XVI Grievance Procedure and Arbitration

Article XVII Safety and Health

Article XVIII Past Practice

Article XIX Duration and Termination

Appendix A

AuwRwWNo

OPN AYM PWN

S

NAMWAwWH

{DocNo=00457489. }

17
17
17
18
18
18
19
19
19
20
20
20
20
20
20
2]
21
21
22
22
22
23
24
24

24
24
24
24
24
24
25
25
25
25
25
25
27
27
28
29
AGREEMENT

THIS AGREEMENT is made and entered into as of the Ist day of January, 2019, by and
between the Municipality of Monroeville, Pennsylvania, a municipal subdivision of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, hereinafter designated as the "Municipality", and the Wage
Policy Committee of the Monroeville Police Department, hereinafter referred to as "Wage Policy
Committee".

WITNESSETH:

WHEREAS, the parties hereto are bound by the act of the Pennsylvania Legislature,
being Act No. 111 of the regular 1968 Session entitled, "Police and Firemen Collective
Bargaining Act; and

WHEREAS, a more than 51 percent of the members of the Police Department have
pursuant to Section 1 of Act No. 111 designated the "Wage Policy Committee" of the
Monroeville Police Department to negotiate on behalf of all the members of the Department with
the Municipality regarding all matters related to wages, salaries, hours, fringe benefits,
grievances and working conditions of their employment; and

WHEREAS, the parties through their designated representatives, have bargained
collectively regarding wages and other conditions of employment, pursuant to the binding
arbitration section of Act 111; and

NOW THEREFORE, This contract, in consideration of the mutual promises and in
consideration of the following agreements by and between the Municipality of Monroeville and
the Wage Policy Committee do hereby agree with each other as follows:

ARTICLE I RECOGNITION

1. The Municipality hereby recognizes the Wage Policy Committee as the
sole and exclusive collective bargaining representative for wage and other terms and conditions
of employment pursuant to the Certification of Representation by the Pennsylvania Labor
Relations Board, in accordance with Act 111 and the Pennsylvania Labor Relations Act, in Case
No. PF-R-86-85-W dated October 29, 1986, for all regular sworn police officers of the
Monroeville Police Department from the rank of probationary patrol officer through the rank of
Lieutenant, and excluding all management level employees.

2, The Employer agrees that it will not enter into any written or oral

agreement with any employees covered by this agreement which is inconsistent with or which in
any way modifies or waives any provision of this agreement.

{DocNo=00457489.1 }
ARTICLE II MANAGEMENT RIGHTS

1. Except to the extent expressly abridged by a specific provision of this
Agreement, or the express provision of the Home Rule Charter, the Municipality reserves and
retains the sole and exclusive right to operate, manage and direct the police department and its
regular police force, as such rights existed prior to the execution of this or any other previous
agreement with the Wage Policy Committee. It is understood and agreed that al] management
rights repose in the Municipality, and such rights must be exercised consistently with the other
provisions of this Agreement. These rights include but are not limited to the following:

A, The right to direct employees of the Department.

B. The right to hire, promote, and retain employees in a position within the
Department, and to suspend, demote, discharge, or take other disciplinary action
against employee, except as limited by applicable laws and Civil Service
regulations and to set standards with respect to these rights.

Cc. The right to relieve employees from duties in conformance with the Civil Service
rules and regulations as outlined by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

D. The right to maintain efficiency of the Department and to set standards for the
safety of the public.

2. The Wage Policy Committee and on behalf of the employees, agrees to
cooperate with the Employer to attain and maintain service and efficiency.

ARTICLE Ul RIGHTS OF THE WAGE POLICY COMMITTEE AND MEMBERS
OF THE MONROEVILLE POLICE DEPARTMENT

1. The Municipality shall make every effort to permit, when on duty, the
members of the Wage Policy Committee to attend all special meetings of the committee and to
meet with individual officers during his or their tour of duty when required. In no event shall
these meetings interfere with the emergency operations of the police department.

2. The Municipality shall take due caution and care to protect the rights of
individual officers in any administrative proceedings that might result in criminal charges or
disciplinary action being filed against an individual officer. The Municipality shall give the
officer the right to have legal counsel before making any statement, which is in addition to
his/her normal police report. The Municipality shall not suspend, demote, or otherwise discipline
an officer without just cause. The officer shall have the right to grieve any disciplinary actions
under this Article including matters of suspension, demotion, or discharge.

3. Suspensions, charges and specifications and all references thereto shall be

removed from the personnel jackets of the members after a period of three (3) years from the date
of occurrence.

{DocNo=00457489.1 }
4, Those members serving as officers in the recognized collective Bargaining
Unit for Monroeville Police Officers or serving as an officer in any police fraternal organization
shall receive necessary time off without loss of scheduled pay to attend meetings, conventions or
any other meetings that are scheduled or called for emergency purposes. Any expenses incurred
while attending such gathering shall be borne by the officer. Also, the officer must give due and
timely notice of such events.

5. Words used in the Agreement in the masculine gender shall include the
feminine and the neuter.

6. Payment of wages to the members of the bargaining unit shall be biweekly
in accordance with present practice. If the scheduled pay day falls on a holiday provided for in
this Agreement, all employees shall be paid before quitting time on the day preceding said
holiday. The pay stubs must be so issued that the employee may retain said stub for his
permanent record and must clearly list the following: Employer’s name, employee's name, period
worked, hours worked, gross wages, itemized deductions, and net pay. Payment of wages may
be by direct deposit ACH.

7. The Wage Policy Committee shall have the privilege of using designated
bulletin boards for the purpose of informing employees of official Bargaining unit meetings,
functions, affairs, and elections.

8. Police Officer’s Bill of Rights —

Any complaint against a Police Officer must be in writing and signed by the complainant
and delivered to the Municipality. The complainant must be willing to confront the accused
Police Officer with regard to the complaint. At any meeting involving both the accused officer
and the complainant, the Municipal Manager, Chief of Police, or the Assistant Chief of Police
must be in attendance.

1. When an anonymous complaint is made against a Police officer and no
corroborative evidence is obtained, the complaint shall be classified as
unfounded.

2. When a citizen complaint is filed greater than three (3) months afier the

date of the alleged event complained of, which if true could not lead to a
criminal! charge, then such complaint shall be classified as unfounded.

3. If a Police officer is interviewed as part of an internal investigative or
disciplinary procedure, and writes a statement as part of that investigation,
or a transcript is taken or other mechanical record is made, of statements
provided by the Police Officer, then a copy of the same must be given to
the interviewed Police Officer, without cost or delay, upon request of said
Police Officer or representative thereof.

4, If any Police Officer under interrogation is in any type of custody, he shall
be completely informed of all his rights under Miranda prior to the
commencement of the interrogation.

{DocNo=00457489. 1 }
5. Any Police Officer under interrogation for the purpose of an internal
investigation that may or may not lead to criminal charges shall be
completely informed of his rights under Garrity.

6. At the request of any Police Officer under interrogation, he shall have the
right to be represented by a member of the Wage/Policy Committee, who
shall remain present at all times during the interrogation. The
interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonable amount of time until
such representation can be obtained.

9, Bidding of Shifts

A. For Police Officers hired on or after April 6, 2016, the Chief of Police shall have
discretion to schedule these officers throughout the department regardless of their seniority for
the first twenty-four (24) months of their employment, provided such scheduling is not used to
discipline the Officers.

B, All Police Officers shall bid on a shift and relief days according to seniority and
will not rotate among other shifts or relief days, except to the extent provided under subpart A or
as otherwise provided herein. The bids shall be posted by the Municipality on the first Monday
in November and the employees shall have at least three (3) weeks to complete the bidding
process, the bids shall then take effect the first pay period in January.

Except for those officers identified in subpart A, a mandatory change in shift may only
take place in the event of an emergency, which is defined for the purpose of this agreement as an
unanticipated event that requires immediate police action. In the event a schedule is changed, the
changed shift shall! be paid at the overtime rate of pay. This section shall not apply to an officer
attending periodic training in which his shift and pass days would need to be changed to allow
attendance during a particular training exercise, however, the Municipality shall make every
effort to schedule training on the officer’s regularly scheduled workday.

This section shall not restrict the Administration from conducting additional bids
throughout the year due to promotions, retirements, officers hired prior to April 6, 2016 being
removed from probationary status, or officers having completed their first twenty-four (24)
months of employment.

ARTICLE IV WAGES

A. Wage Increase — Percentage based on top patrolman’s wage as of December 31 of
each year, applied across wage scale. See Appendix A.

Jan.1 2019 Jan. 12020 —_Jan.1 2021 Jan. 1 2022
3.0% 2.75% 3.0% 3.0%

{DocNo=00457489.1 }
B. Equalize and maintain equal wage scale between the ranks of top Patrolmen and

Lieutenants.

1. Patrolman Classification

A. Classification of police patrolman hired prior to April 6, 2016, shal! have six (6)
pay steps, and ernployees within such classification shall be eligible for advancement from Step
A to Step F as follows:

STEP A -
STEP B -
STEP C -
STEP D -
STEP E —
STEP F -

After six (6) months of continuous service in Step A advance to Step B
After six (6) months of continuous service in Step B advance to Step C
After one (1) year continuous service in Step C advance to Step D
After one (1) year continuous service in Step D advance to Step E
After one (1) year continuous service in Step E advance to Step F

Top Patrolman

B. Wage Scale for new Police Officers hired prior to April 6, 2016 shall be as
follows:

STEP A -
STEP B -
STEP C -
STEP D -
STEP E -
STEP F -

$25.00

60% of top Patrolman rate
70% of top Patrolman rate
80% of top Patrolman rate
90% of top Patrolman Rate
100% of top Patrolman Rate

C. For police officers hired on or after April 6, 2016, the classification of police
patrolman shall have eight (8) steps and employees within such classification shall be eligible for
advancement from Step A to Step F as follows:

STEP A -
STEP B -—
STEP C-—
STEP Cl -
STEP D -
STEP D1 —
STEP E -
STEP F -

After six (6) months of continuous service in Step A advance to Step B
After six (6) months of continuous service in Step B advance to Step C
After one (1) year of continuous service in Step C advance to Step C1
After one (1) year of continuous service in Step C1 advance to Step D
After one (1) year of continuous service in Step D advance to Step D1
After one (1) year of continuous service in Step D1 advance to Step E
After one (1) year of continuous service in Step E advance to Step F
Top Patrolman

Wage scale for new officers hired on or after April 6, 2016 shall be as follows:

STEP A -
STEP B-
STEP C -
STEP Cl -

{DocNo=00457489.1 }

$25

60% of top Patrolman rate
70% of top Patrolman rate
75% of top Patrolman rate
STEP D —- 80% of top Patrolman rate
STEP DI— 85% of top Patrolman rate

STEP E- 90% of top Patrolman rate
STEP F — 100% of top Patrolman rate
2. Additional Police Classification - Classifications for police positions other than

regular patrolman performing police work other than regular patrol work which shall be created,
such as, detective, community safety officer, training officer, juvenile officer and traffic officer
shall be appointed from the ranks of regular police officers.

3. Specialist Pay - Premium pay for persons performing in the capacity of detective,
community safety officer, training officer, juvenile officer, traffic officer and school resource
officer or other category of special activity designated by the Municipal Manager shall receive
$1,800.00 annually for the performance of the special detail. This additional $1,800.00 shall be
made in two annual installments of equal amounts.

4. Shift Differential — From January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2016, shift
differentia] shall be $0.70 per hour to be paid to officers working the hours other than 7:00 a.m,
to 3:00 p.m. Effective January 1, 2017, shift differential shall be $0.85 per hour to be paid to
officers working the hours other than 7:00 am to 3:00 pm.

5. Longevity Payment - Each police officer who has completed three (3) years of
continuous service shall be entitled to a separate annual payment in the pay that is the first pay in
December in the amount .10 of 1% of top patrolman base annual salary per year of service and
for each succeeding year of service per continuous years of service and no cap shall be placed on
the number of years for which longevity compensation is computed. For officers who are hired
after January 1, 2012, longevity will be paid beginning with completion of five (5) years of
continuous service.

6. Supervisor Pay — The following shall be the pay differential for supervisors:
a. Corporals shall be paid an additional $2.00 above the top patrol rate.

b. Sergeants shall be paid an additional $3.00 above the top patrol rate.

c. Lieutenants shall be paid an additional $4.00 above the top patrol rate.

ARTICLE V OVERTIME

1. Overtime Work - The Municipality shall not hire special police for the express
purpose of eliminating overtime for regular full time police officers. Preference shall be given to
regular full time police officers regarding all work details, schedules and overtime.

2. Overtime Rate - The Municipality shall pay each police officer one and one half

(1-1/2) times his appropriate hourly rate for all hours worked in excess of eight (8) hours per day
or forty (40) hours per week. In calculating time worked, all paid time shall be included, whether

{DoeNo=00457489 1 }
the time is actually worked or not. For Police Officers hired on or after April 6, 2016, only time
actually worked shall be used in calculating time worked for purposes of overtime.

If an officer works an overtime detail and call off sick for his regularly scheduled shift in
the same workday, the officer will be compensated at the straight time rate for the overtime
detail]. In the event the Police Officer has a legitimate injury or iliness and provides written
documentation from a doctor then the Officer will be compensated at the appropriate overtime
rate of pay. For the purpose of this paragraph, a workday shall be defined as a twenty-four hour
period beginning at 7:00 a.m. one day and ending at 7:00 a.m. the next day.

3. Appropriate Hourly Rate - The appropriate hourly rate is defined as the regular
hourly rate added to all forms of compensation, such as, longevity, shift differential, specialist
pay, and all other compensation paid by the Municipality

4, Overtime Scheduled by Classification — Overtime shall be scheduled by
particular divisions of the department, i.e., patrol division, detective division, special operations
division, and traffic division. Overtime shall be allocated to these respective divisions personnel
prior to allowing a person outside of the division for which overtime is required to bid on that
overtime. Individuals filling a higher classification may be utilized in a lower classification
when necessary, but at their current rate of pay.

5. Overtime Option — The Administration will provide officers with the option to
receive compensatory time or pay for all overtime hours worked.

6. Accumulated Compensatory Time — Officers shall be allowed to accumulate
compensatory time to a maximum of 480 hours. Accumulated compensatory time shall be taken
at the time of an officer's retirement or he may elect to receive compensation totaling the dollar
value of accumulated compensatory time. All compensatory time over 480 hours is to be
scheduled for utilization within a thirty (30) day period of earning said compensatory time. All
time not scheduled within thirty (30) days of notification of attaining 480 hours will be forfeited
by the employee. It is the employee’s responsibility to maintain 480 hours or less.

All Officers hired after the effective date of July 21, 2005 shall be allowed to accumulate
compensatory time to a maximum of three hundred sixty (360) hours, Accumulated
compensatory time shall be taken at the time of an officer’s retirement or he may elect to receive
compensation totaling the dollar value of accumulated compensatory time. All compensatory
time over three hundred sixty (360) hours is to be scheduled for utilization within thirty (30) days
of earning said compensatory time. All time not scheduled within thirty (30) days of notification
of attaining three hundred sixty (360) hours will be forfeited by the employee. It is the
employee’s responsibility to maintain three hundred sixty (360) hours or less.

7. Use of Compensatory Time — All compensatory time requests of more than four
(4) hours will be granted to an employee provided that it does not result in overtime cost to the
Municipality. Once compensatory time has been approved it cannot be withdrawn due to others
using others types of leaves which causes overtime. No compensatory time will be granted on

(DocNo=00457489.1 }
Holidays and/or Christmas Eve and New Years Eve. Compensatory time cannot be scheduled
more than sixty (60) days in advance.

8. Overtime Utilization Policy —

Purpose — The purpose of the overtime utilization policy is to provide an equal
opportunity for police officers to meet the established replacement needs of the department.
Opportunities for overtime are generally elective on the part of the individual officer; however,
the administration reserves the right to require (draft) personnel for overtime work based upon
the needs of the department except for probationary employees and police officers not assigned
to the patrol division.

Shift Overtime Selection System — Al! Patrol Officers will be considered for shift
overtime unless they give notification of intention to sign off for the day. Sign off codes must be
placed prior to the overtime offer.

Selection for shift overtime shall be based upon the following priorities, day off on the
shift assigned and the least recent (oldest) opportunity. If more than one (1) officer has equal
opportunity, and the same call out date, seniority will determine the call out.

The following priorities will be followed:

Days off from the shift with the vacancy, officer with the least recent opportunity

Days off from the other two shifts, officer with the least recent opportunity

Double out from the shift going off duty, officer with the least recent opportunity

Double out from the shift coming on duty following the shift with the vacancy,

Officer with the least recent opportunity

5. Agreed to split four hour shift between shift going off duty and the shift coming on
Duty

6. Volunteer from any other division before draft

7. Draft the least senior man to the most senior man from the shift going off duty on a
Rotating basis

8. Draft Exempt

eM

A. Probationary employees (except in case of emergency)
B. Police officers not assigned to the patrol division (except in case of emergency)
C. Police officers off duty on the day of the vacancy (except in case of emergency)

{DocNo=00457489 1 )
Special Detail Overtime Selection System — Special detail overtime is exempt from the shift
overtime utilization policy. Special detail overtime is defined as any event known at least four
(4) hours in advance (i.e.: athletic events, mall details, parades, public gatherings, special patrol
details, etc.) that normally would involve less than an eight (8) hour overtime period. Special
detail overtime shall be rotated equally among the police officers within the department. Both
acceptance and non-acceptance of a detail shall be counted as an opportunity, in the number of
hours, towards that officer’s special detail overtime opportunity hours.

The following are the exceptions whereby an officer would not be called to work or charged
with non--acceptance of special detai] overtime opportunity hours.

1. The officer is already working his assigned shift, flex shift or another overtime detail

2. The officer is off on paid leave, to include the following:

Anniversary

Bereavement

Birthday

Comp time (greater than four hours)

Injury

Jury Duty

Military

Paternity

Personal Day

Personal Holiday

Sick

I. Vacation

3. Officers that are off during “Block Weeks” of vacation shall not be called or credited for
overtime opportunities during that time. Pass days before; during and after the block weeks
of vacation shall be considered vacation for the purposes of this section.

room he ao op

Special detail opportunities will be logged by the staffing computer! If a special detail overtime
shift arises, the most senior officer with the least amount of special detail overtime opportunity
hours shall be notified of the opportunity. Regardless of whether or not the officer accepts or
declines the special detail overtime, he shall be “charged” with the number of hours for that
particular special detail overtime. The next special detail overtime will subsequently be offered
first to the next most senior officer with the least amount of special detail overtime opportunity
hours. This procedure will be followed from the most senior officer to the least senior officer.
Once the list goes from the most senior officer through the least senior officer in the department,
the next opportunity shall revert back to the most senior officer with the least amount of special
detail overtime opportunity hours and will continue in this manner as special detail overtime
opportunities arise. In the event that a newly hired officer becomes eligible to work special detail
overtime, he shall receive as his beginning special detail overtime hours the average number of
hours accrued by the officers on the list. At the beginning of every calendar year, the number of
special detail overtime hours shal! revert back to zero for all officers and the process shall begin
again from the most senior officer to the least senior officer.

{DacNo=00457489.1 }
Police Officers shall not be scheduled, called out, or credited for an opportunity to work for a
twenty-four (24) hour shift cycle (i.e. 7:00 a.m— 7:00 a.m.) except in the event of an emergency.

When a Police Officer utilizes sick leave that Officer shall not be eligible for overtime for a
sixteen (16) hour period following the shift called off sick, except in the event of an emergency,

Officers may opt out of the special detail overtime rotation. Officers who wish to not be
contacted for special detai! overtime shall sign a waiver prior to the start of the calendar year. An
Officer who has opted out may be returned to the rotation one time during the calendar year upon
notice. Officers returning will be credited the average amount of hours in the detail system at the
time of their return.

Short Notice Details: Details known less than four (4) hours in advance shall be filled
according to the “pick list” generated by Telestaff. Officers who accept the detail shall be
credited for the hours worked, officers who reject the detail shall not be credited for the hours.

 

ARTICLE VI VACATION

1. Accrued Vacation — Vacation shall be accrued at the following rate:
After 6 months of service 5 working days
After | year of service 10 working days
After 5 years of service 15 working days
After 10 years of service 20 working days
After 15 years of service 25 working days
After 16 years of service 26 working days
After 17 years of service 27 working days
After 18 years of service 28 working days
After 19 years of service 29 working days
After 20 years of service 30 working days

2. Annual Vacation Schedule —

(A) Vacation requests may be submitted by seniority in the following manner:

Officers with 30 days submit request 1° week of vacation bid
Officers with 25 days submit request 1“ weck of vacation bid
Officers with 20 days submit request 2"! week of vacation bid
Officers with 15 days submit request 24 week of vacation bid
Officers with 10 days submit request 24 week of vacation bid

(B) Vacation requests shall be granted on a seniority basis. Vacation requests
submitted after vacation bid dates shall be granted provided however, that any
such date requested is not at maximum quota.

{DorNo=60457489.L }
3. Block Week Vacation Scheduling — Each officer may be required to schedule his
vacation in certain block weeks during the first two full weeks of February. Block weeks are
defined as five (5) consecutive scheduled work days per week, provided however, individual
vacation days may be taken as follows:

Officers with 30 days 3 block weeks and 15 individua! days

Officers with 25 days 2 block weeks and 15 individual days

Officers with 20 days 2 block weeks and 10 individual days

Officers with 15 days 1 block week and 10 individual days

Officers with 10 days 1 block week and 5 individual days

Officers with 5 days 1 block week or 5 individual days

4, Vacation Quotas —

A. A maximum of two (2) patrol officers and one (1) patrol supervisor officer shall
be permitted on vacation during each shift.

B. A maximum of two (2) detectives and one (1) supervising detective shall be
permitted on vacation during each shift.

C. Supervisors may authorize a day’s vacation to any officer on short notice even

though it may exceed the maximum permissible number of officers on vacation,
provided however, by doing so there is no overtime involved or the shift does not
go below shift minimum. The determination of what constitutes a shift minimum
is a management right encompassed by 15.4.2.1.D.

5. Vacation Request on a Holiday — Any officer requesting vacation on a holiday
shall be required to take five (5) or more vacation days with the requested holiday as one of the
vacation days. Eight (8) hours straight time shall be paid for the holiday in addition to vacation

pay.
ARTICLE VII HOLIDAYS AND PERSONAL DAYS

1, Holidays — The following holidays shall be considered as official paid holidays
for purpose of implementing the terms of this contract.

1. New Years Day 6. Thanksgiving
2. Easter 7. Christmas Day
3. Memorial Day 8. Employees Wedding Anniversary or
4. July 4th Hire Anniversary Date (if single)
5. Labor Day 9. Employees Birthday
2. Personal Holidays — Each officer shall receive six (6) additional paid holidays

of the officer's own choice each calendar year. Notification of intent to utilize a personal holiday
shall be given one (1) week in advance. The Municipality will make every effort to provide the
personal holiday when requested and requests may be made later than one week minimum;
however, the Municipality reserves the right to maintain minimum standards of police protection

[DocNo=00457489 1}
and establish priorities for time off which could result in alternate days off for the personal
holiday but in all cases with the agreement of the individual officer. Personal holidays are not to
be construed as vacation leave.

Personal Holidays for newly hired Police Officers shall be pro-rated in the following
manner. Officers being hired between January 1‘ and June 30" shall receive six (6) personal
holidays. Officers being hired between July 15‘ and December 31“ shall receive three (3)
personal Holidays.

3. Anniversary Date and Birthday — Each police officer may move his/her
anniversary date and birthday within seven (7) workdays of their official dates. Notification of
intent shall be given one (1) week or less in advance and subject to the following exceptions:

1. To any other official paid holiday, Christmas Eve and/or New Year's Eve.
2. To Officer's Pass Day for purpose of overtime.

4, Holiday Pay — Each police officer scheduled to work on an official holiday is
entitled to paid holiday compensation which shall be at double time and one half (2 1/2) times
the officers regular base hourly wage for all hours worked. Each police officer scheduled to
work on an official holiday on his regular scheduled day off is entitled to paid holiday
compensation which shall be at double time and one half (2-1/2) times his regular base hourly
wage for all hours worked. Each police officer scheduled to be off on an official holiday is
entitled to his regular base hourly wage for a normal workday. Each police officer whose regular
scheduled day off falls on an official holiday is entitled to an additional eight (8) hours pay at this
regular base hourly wage.

5. Special Detail on Official Holiday — Each police officer scheduled to work or
called out to work a special detail on an official paid holiday as defined in this article shall be
paid at the holiday rate of double time and one half (2-1/2) times the officers regular base hourly
wage for a minimum of four (4) hours.

ARTICLE VIII SICK/INJURY LEAVE

1. Sick Leave — Each sworn police officer will receive at the beginning of each
calendar year, an allocation of ten (10) petty sick leave days which are to be used for absence due
to illness or injury of a non-occupational nature and for which worker’s compensation is not
paid. Police Officers shall be entitled to their full wages and benefits as provided for in this
agreement for each of the days they may be absent on sick leave with a bonafide illness or injury.
At the option of the employee at the end of each calendar year, the Municipality will buy back
each unused sick day at $100 per day, not to exceed a total of $1,000.00 or the employee may
accrue up to 30 sick days for emergency purposes. The Municipality will provide an initial 20
banked days. In the case of retirement, all unused days will be paid at a rate of $100.00 each and
payment will be made in the first pay in February. For police officers hired on or after April 6,
2016, there shall be no buy-back of unused sick days upon retirement.

{DoeNo=00457489.1 }
Sick time for newly hired Police Officers shall be pro-rated in the following manner:
Officers being hired between January 1‘ and June 30" shall receive ten (10) petty sick days and
officer hired between July |“ and December 31 shall receive five (5) petty sick days. Newly
hired officers shall also receive twenty (20) sick days in the bank upon appointment to the
department.

2, Short Term Disability — Employees shall additionally be entitled to short term
disability, for illnesses of a nonoceupational nature and for which worker’s compensation is not
paid, as provided below:

A, A short-term disability is defined as a period of disability which may be
anticipated to last ten (10) or more calendar days.

B. The employers shall, within each calendar year provide up to a maximum of
twenty-six (26) weeks of short-term disability pay at 78% of regular base
earnings, for each occurrence of short-term disability or recurrence of previously
compensated short-term disability.

Cc. In order to receive short-term disability benefits, the employee must present to the
Municipal Manager, for his approval appropriate medical documentation that the
illness may be anticipated to last ten (10) or more calendar days.

D. There shali be a ten (10) calendar day waiting period for each occurrence (as
distinguished from reoccurrence) of disability. During the waiting period, an
employee shall first use petty sick leave, if such leave is available. When petty
sick leave is not available, and the employee does not elect to use other earned
leave, the employee shall be placed in approved leave without pay status during
which the employee shall retain ail benefits provided under this Agreement, and
shall continue to earn municipal and bargaining unit seniority. If an employee
suffers a reoccurrence of an earlier compensated disability; there shall be no
second or subsequent waiting period. In the event that an employee becomes
disabled more than once in a calendar year, and the second disability is not a
reoccurrence of the first, the Municipality may, upon a case by case basis and at
the sole discretion of the Municipal Manager, assume the cost of the second or
subsequent waiting period.

E. The Municipality shall provide a self-insured short-term disability policy at a
fixed cost of $10 per month for all members. The entire cost of the policy shall be
paid by the employee and payments shall be deducted from each employee’s pay
on an after-tax basis. No income taxes shall be deducted from any short-term
disability payments.

3. This short-term disability period shall be fixed per incident at twenty-six (26)
weeks, however in the event that the illness remains for any length of time beyond the twenty-six
(26) weeks as documented by appropriate professional medical opinion, the Municipality shall
self-insure this additional period of time pending outcome or disability claim application.

{DocNo=00457489.) }
4, Related to the short-term disability leave, it is agreed the periodic medical
examinations may be required by the Municipal Manager and, if so required, will be at the
Municipality’s expense.

ARTICLE IX BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

1. Immediate Family — Each police officer shall be entitled to his/her next five (5)
scheduled working days off with pay in the event of a death in the employees’ immediate family.
If the death occurs while the police officer is on vacation, the employee shall be entitled to
bereavement leave in the same manner, and shall not be charged with vacation leave. For the
purpose of this section, the immediate family is defined as spouse, child, stepchild, parent, and
parent of spouse, grandchild, sister, brother, and grandparent of employee.

2. Near Family — Each police officer shall be entitled to his/her next three (3)
scheduled working days off with pay in the event of a death in the employees near family. If the
death occurs while the police officer is on vacation, the employee shall be entitled to
bereavement leave in the same manner, and shall not be charged with vacation leave. For the
purpose of this section the near family is defined as grandparent of spouse, sister-in-law, brother-
in-law, and foster child.

3. Other Family Members — Each police officer shall be entitled to one (1) day off
with pay in the event of a death in the employees other family. No payment will be made if the
funeral falls on a day when the employee is not scheduled to work, or if travel to the funeral is
not feasible. For the purpose of this section, the other family members are defined as aunts,
uncles, nephew, niece, and first cousins.

ARTICLE X ADDITIONAL LEAVE

1. Additional Leave — The Municipality may grant an additional leave to each
police officer in emergencies for a period not to exceed three (3) consecutive days, either with or
without pay, under such circumstances as it deems appropriate as determined by the Municipal
Manager. Examples of additional leave may include but are not limited to grievous injury or
illness requiring emergency attention for the spouse, children, or other dependents of an officer;
crisis requiring extreme emotional adjustment where the mental stability of the officer and his
ability to perform his duties may be in question; and other instances where in the judgment of the
Municipality the best interest of the police service of the Municipality and the individual police
officer are served by the granting of additional leave.

2. Family/Medical Leave Act — Family/Medical Leave shall be granted in
accordance with Section 3.15 of the Employee Handbook.

{DocNo=00457489.1 }
ARTICLE XI MODIFIED DUTY WORK ASSIGNMENT

1. A modified duty work assignment program shall be instituted to require
employees to perform duties other than normal duties, which suit their physical condition. No
employee shall perform modified duty work assignments for more than six (6) months without
approval of the administration. The types of modified duty assignments are as follows: reception
desk work, report writing, records maintenance, vehicle shuttling, etc. All modified duty
assignments shall be performed in civilian clothes, on the shift and at the time determined by the
Municipal Manager provided that nothing contained herein shall abridge the rights of an
employee under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Workers Compensation Act, disability or
pension system.

ARTICLE XII INSURANCE

Health care benefits shall be provided to all full-time sworn police officers and their
immediate family and qualified dependents, and shall be fully paid by the municipality except
that: between January 1, 2019 and December 31, 2019 all participating sworn police officers
shall contribute 8% of total cost of healthcare premium deducted on a pre-tax basis; and,
effective January 1, 2020 and thereafter, all participating sworn police officers shall contribute
9% of total cost of healthcare premium deducted on a pre-tax basis; and, effective January 1,
2021 and thereafter, all participating sworn police officers shall contribute 10% of total cost of
healthcare premium deducted on a pre-tax basis; and, effective January |, 2022 and thereafter, all
participating sworn police officers shall contribute 10% of total cost of healthcare premium
deducted on a pre-tax basis.

1. Health Care — It is the intent of the employer to provide Healthcare coverage and
other health related coverage to the emptoyee. Said coverage is as follows:

a. Hospitalization —- The Municipality shall provide active officers with health
insurance coverage through the existing MBS PPO 1500 Q
. Basic Eye Care Vision benefits of America Plan C
C, High Option Dental
d. Basic Prescription Drug - MBS PPO 1500 Q

Further, it is the intent of the Employer and the Union to work together to contral increased costs
of Healthcare benefits. The employer shall have the right to seek out other alternate health
insurance plans including via other providers. The alternate plan selected by the Municipality
must be comparable to the current health insurance plan (to include vision, dental and
prescription benefits) enjoyed by the bargaining unit. Once the Municipality has selected an
alternate plan, it must notify the Police Wage/Policy Committee (WPC) and provide a
comprehensive summary of all plan benefits to the WPC for analysis and consideration.

If the WPC disagrees that the suggested alternate plan is comparable it shall notify the
Municipality in writing within fifteen (15) calendar days of receiving the presentation. The

(DocNo=00457489.1 }
parties shall then submit the dispute as to comparability to expedited arbitration. The arbitrator if
not agreed upon by the parties shall be selected from a list of three arbitrators provided by the
AAA,

The hearing shall be held within 45 calendar days of the WPC’s notification that the alternate
plan has been rejected. The arbitrator shall thereafter issue his/her award within 15 calendar days
of the close of the hearing. The award shall either grant the alternate plan or mandate that
coverage remain pursuant to the existing plan. The Municipality shall only be permitted to
arbitrate a plan once per calendar year.

If the Municipality receives notice or information indicating that its healthcare plan costs will be
subject to the Affordable Care Act’s “Cadillac Tax” excise tax, the Municipality will give the
Union written notice of that fact and the parties will immediately negotiate changes in the plan
design, plan and/or plan carrier in order to avoid the imposition of the tax. If no agreement is
reached within fifteen (15) calendar days of the Municipality’s written notice to the Union
regarding the issue, then the parties will proceed to an expedited interest arbitration proceeding in
accordance with Act 111. The sole purpose for that expedited arbitration proceeding will be for
the arbitration panel to modify the plan, plan design and/or plan carrier in order to reduce the cost
of coverage and eliminate the exposure to the Cadillac Tax. The decision of the arbitration panel
on this issue shall be issued within forty-five (45) calendar days of the appointment of the neutral
arbitrator.

2. Health Care Rebate Program — For Police Officers hired prior to April
6, 2106, the Municipality shall offer a cash rebate program for non-participation in the
Municipality’s group health care plan. The cash rebate shall be forty-five percent (45%) of the
monthly premiums paid by the Municipality and shall be paid on a monthly basis. Employees
shall have the right to cancel the agreement at any time.

For Police Officers hired on or after April 6, 2016, the Municipality shall offer a cash rebate
program for non-participation in the Municipality’s group health care plan. The cash rebate shall
be $3,000 annually for a family, husband and wife, and parent with children, and $1,500 annually
for single. Payments shall be made on a monthly basis and, in order to qualify, the employee
must notify the Municipality in advance and affirm in writing that they have health insurance
through another employer-provided group health care plan.

3. Life Insurance — Life Insurance shall be provided to all full-time sworn police
officers in the amount of $85,000.00 with $170,000.00 accidental death double indemnity and
shall be fully paid by the Municipality.

4, Non-Work Related Long Term Disability Insurance: The Municipality shall
provide a long term disability (LTD) benefit through an LTD insurance carrier selected at the
discretion of the Municipality for police officers who suffer a non-service related injury or
illness. The LTD benefit shall be in the amount of sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 2/3%) of a
police officer’s base salary, which may be subject to offsets and deductions per the terms of the

{(DoeNo=00457489.1 }
insurance policy. The Municipality shall not be obligated to provide any LTD benefit beyond that
which is provided by the LTD policy.

5. Police Professional Liability Insurance — Each full-time sworn police officer
shall be insured against liability claims that may arise out of the performance of his duties. The
insurance shall be fully paid by the Municipality and shall have the following coverage: Two
hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) per individual, five hundred thousand dollars
($500,000.00) per claim and a one million-dollar ($1,000,000.00) aggregate.

6. Reimbursement of Legal Defense Costs — The Municipality shall reimburse
legal defense costs incurred by an officer who is charged with the commission of a crime arising
out of the performance of his duties where the charges are dropped or he is not found guilty after
trial.

ARTICLE XI PENSION RETIREMENT

1. Pension Eligibility — Each full-time sworn police officer may retire at age fifty-
five (55) with twenty-five (25) years of service. An early retirement option shall be available to
all full-time police officers with the following provisions: Early retirement after twenty-five (25)
years of service and attainment of age fifty (50). Any full-time police officer may exercise this
option at a time designated by the Municipality, known as the "open window". This "Window"
will be open annually upon the completion of an actuarial study regarding this benefit.

Early Retirement Benefit — The early retirement benefit shall be provided to a member
of the police force with twenty or more years of service who terminates employment prior to the
completion of superannuation retirement age and service requirements and who files a written
application for any early retirement benefit with the governing body of the Municipality. The
early retirement benefit shall become effective as of the date the application is filed with the
governing body or the date designated on the application whichever is later, and shall be actuarial
equivalent of a partial superannuation retirement benefit calculated by using the last actuarial
valuation report filed by the Public Employee Retirement Commission under the Act of
December 18, 1984 (P.L. 1005, No. 205), the Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act.

2. Pension Contributions — Each member shall contribute five (5%) percent of
gross earnings to the pension fund plan. In the event any member separates from Municipal
service, he shall reccive the dollar amount of contributions made plus interest earnings of five
and one-half (5-1/2% percent) compounded quarterly. If the unfunded liability of the pension
fund is reduced or paid off, the employee contributions may be reduced at an equal percentage
rate.

3. Calculation of Pension Benefits —

(DocNo=00457489, | }
A. The monthly pension benefit shall be calculated at 50% of the participant’s
monthly average salary.

B. For police officers hired prior to January 24, 2001, normal retirement
benefits shall be the average of the highest 36 months during the last 60 months of the
participant’s employment, and service-related disability pensions shall be based on the average of
the participant’s highest 36 months. Lump sum payments will be included in the calculation of
monthly pension benefits, including service related disability pensions, consistent with past
practice.

Cc. For police officers hired after January 24, 2001, the monthly average
salary shall be the average of the last 36 months of employment, for normal retirement benefits
and service-related disability pensions. Lump sum payments received upon retirement shall not
be included in the calculation of monthly pension benefits, including service related disability
pensions, except to the extent that said payments are for benefits which were earned during the
calculation period, pursuant to the Pennsylvania Auditor Genera! Bulletin No. 2001-01, as
amended,

4, Service Increments — Each member shall be eligible for a fifty ($50.00) dollar
per month increase upon retirement for each year past twenty-five (25) years he remains as a full-
time police officer in the Municipality of Monroeville. The Maximum shall be one hundred
($100.00) dollars per month for twenty-seven (27) years or more of service.

5. Social Security Offset — The Municipality shall modify the Police Pension Trust
Agreement to provide for a zero (0%) percent offset of social security, except for a disability
pension.

6. Survivor Benefits —

Definitions- Attending College — For an eligible child shall mean the child is
registered at an accredited institution of higher learning and is carrying a minimum course toad of
7 credit hours per semester.

A, Death of participant after beginning to receive benefits under this
plan or if eligible to retire and dies before retirement benefits commence. — A survivor
benefit shall be paid in an amount equal to 50% of the participant’s monthly accrued benefit as of
the date of death. The survivor benefit shall be paid monthly to the surviving spouse of the
participant, if any, until the date of death of the surviving spouse. Upon the death of the
surviving spouse, or if there is no surviving spouse, the survivor benefit shall be paid monthly in
equal shares to the surviving dependent children of the deceased participant until the attainment
of age 18, or if any dependent children are attending college, for the child until they obtain age
23. The shares payable to the surviving dependent children shall be adjusted as each child ceases
to be eligible to receive a share of the benefits hereunder.

B. Return of Contributions — If a Participant shall die before payment of a
benefit has commenced and without eligibility for payment of a Survivor Benefit under Article

{DocNo=004574B9.1 }
VI, Section 6.02 of the Police Pension Plan, the Beneficiary shall be eligible to receive a
distribution in an amount equal to the Accumulated Contributions of the Participant as of the date
of death of the Participant. If the Participant has received Disability Benefits, the amount of the
distribution of the Accumulated Contributions shall be reduced by the amount of Disability
Retirement Benefits which have been paid.

7, Pension Vesting — An officer completing a minimum of twelve (12) years service
with the department shall be entitled to vest his pension account in the event he is voluntarily or
involuntarily separated from Municipal Service. This allows a member to leave Municipal
Service without withdrawing his pension contributions and to receive a monthly pension benefit
at such time as he attains fifty (55) years of age and his account has remained on record for the
required twenty-five (25) year period. Vested police officer shall be entitled to receive a monthly
retirement benefit payable on the officer’s normal retirement date equal to fifty (50%) percent of
average monthly earnings times the ratio of completed years of service to complete years from
date of hire to normal retirement date.

8. Use of Military Service Time —

A. Each police officer shall be entitled to use up to twenty-four (24) months
of non-intervening military service in the Armed Forces of the United States toward retirement,
except for service increments, provided, however, such participating employee makes an
additional contribution to the pension fund in order to compensate the fund for the crediting of
such service. Said additional contributions shall be calculated by the Municipal Actuary in
accordance with State Law. The participating employee at the time of selecting to purchase the
non-intervening military service time shall have the option of utilizing the previous twenty-four
(24) months for benefit calculation or of using an estimate of the prospective twenty-four (24)
months utilizing established contractual obligations. A DD214 with honorable discharge must be
presented to the Police Pension Trust Committee for validation and qualification.

B. Each police officer shall be entitled to purchase intervening military
service in accordance with Act 600, 53 P.S. 770(a).

9, Work Related Disability Pension:

SECTION 1: Calculation of Benefits - The amount of monthly benefit payable to a Plan
participant who is "totally and permanently disabled" as a result of a service related injury shall
be equal to the following:

a. Work Related Disability from Day One on the Job — 50 percent of the participant's
monthly average salary, as set forth in Article XIII Section 3. However, pursuant to Act
30 of 2002, disability pension benefits will be offset or reduced by the amount of social
security disability benefits received for the same injuries.

SECTION 2: It is the intention of the Municipality to exclude consideration of short-

term disability payments, workmen’s compensation payments and the like when calculating a
participant's monthly average salary for disability pension benefit purposes. Therefore, for

{DocNo=00457489.1 )
purposes of the Plan, "monthly average salary" shall take into account only wages paid to the
participant while he was an active employee. Time spent on Heart and Lung Act leave shall be
deemed active service.

SECTION 3: Definition of "Total and Permanent Disability” and "Wages" - "Total and
Permanent Disability" shall mean a condition of physical and mental impairment due to which a
Plan participant is unable to perform the usual and customary duties of a Monroeville Police
officer, which condition is reasonably expected to continue to be permanent for the remainder of
the Participant's lifetime.

Whether a plan participant is "totally and permanently disabled" for Plan purposes shall
be determined by a medical examiner appointed by or acceptable to the Municipality.

"Wages" are total compensation, including but not limited to, overtime, longevity, shift
differential, and premium pay. Wages shall be based upon an individual's W-2 form for a
calendar year, except as set forth in Article XII Section 3. C.

SECTION 4: Payment of Disability Benefits — Disability payments from the Plan shall
be made monthly as of the first day of each month commencing as of the first day of the month
immediately following or coincident with the participant's disability date.

SECTION 5: The disability pension benefit provided by the Plan shall also include the
Widow's Benefit established by Monroeville Ordinance No. 892.

10. + Health Care Benefits for Retirees and Spouse —

A. For all officers hired prior to 7/21/05, al] health care benefits as provided to all police
officers covered by this contract shall be provided to all police officers who retire, and to the
spouse of retired police officer, and shall be fully paid by the Municipality until such time as they
respectively obtain the age of Medicare eligibility.

A Freedom Blue Supplement plan equal to the currently available plan shall be provided
to each retired police officer and spouse beginning at Medicare eligibility.

B. For all officers hired after 7/21/05, the Municipality shall create and provide for
Officers to exercise two options. The first is a tax-exempt Retirement Health Savings Account
(RHS) in order to provide an array of approved benefits to its member Officers. The second is a
tax deferred 457 Retirement Plan to provide supplemental retirement funds to member Officers.
In either case, the Municipality shall contribute $1,175 per year on behalf of the Officer to his/her
chosen plan. Annual contributions shall be made by the Municipality no later than the Officer’s
anniversary date of hire. The choice exercised by the Officer shall be irrevocable unless Internal
Revenue Code Provisions allows the Officer to transfer funds from one plan to the other without
penalty to the Municipality. In the case of the RHS Plan, the Municipality shall take whatever
steps are necessary to establish the trust, to appoint a trustee and to obtain IRC approval. In the

{DocNho=00457489.1 }
case of the 457 Retirement Plan, the Municipality shall take whatever steps are necessary to
establish it.

Additionally, for Officers hired after 7/21/05, said Officers, their immediate families and
qualified dependents (i.e. individual, husband and wife, parent with children, and family
coverage) shall, upon retirement of the Officer, be permitted to remain in the Hospitalization
Group Plan in effect for the full-time active members of the Police Department so long as the
retiring Officer reimburses the Municipality for the cost of said coverage. This shall apply to
dental and vision benefits under the same circumstances.

11. —_ Life Insurance for Retirees — The Municipality shal! provide each police officer
who retires $15,000.00 in life insurance payable to retirees’ beneficiary upon death of retiree.

ARTICLE XIV CLOTHING, UNIFORM, EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE
ALLOWANCE

1. Clothing, Uniform, Equipment and Maintenance Allowance — The
Municipality agrees to pay annually to each officer a uniform allowance of nine hundred
($900.00) dollars and accumulative for two (2) years. Uniform allowance shall include all leather
goods. Clothing, Uniform, Equipment and Maintenance Allowance shall include all items used
or worn in the performance of an officer’s duty including secondary or “back-up” weapons.

2. New Hires — New police officers hired by the Municipality shall receive a
complete outfitting of uniforms at the Municipality's expense, which initial outfitting shall be in
lieu of the uniform allowance for the year of hire, and shall be paid at fifty (50%) percent) for the
following year.

3. Extra-Ordinary Uniform Cost — All extra ordinary uniforms costs, i.e., specified
department cleaning process, additions to or redesign of uniforms, etc. will be borne by the
Municipality of Monroeville.

4. Article Damage — In the event that a Police Officer damages his clothing or
equipment (to include but not limited to, wrist watch, eyeglasses) in the course of the
performance of his assigned duties, reimbursement for such damaged article or articles shall be
provided by the Municipality upon presentation of the damaged article and providing the damage
was not the direct result of neglect or negligence on the part of the officer. (Watches-$200-
maximum and Sun Glasses-$150 maximum)

5. Safety Equipment — The Municipality shall provide Police Officers assigned to
the Traffic Division with the necessary safety equipment needed for the performance of their
assigned duties. Such equipment shall consist of motorcycle helmets, riding boot, gloves, safety
glasses and waterproof clothing,

6. Soft Body Armor — Effective as of April 6, 2016, the Municipality shall pay one
hundred percent (100%) of the cost of soft body armor for Police Officers. These vests will be
replaced in accordance with the manufacturer’s established useful life, It shall be the

(DocNo=00457489.1 }
responsibility of the Police Officer to notify the Administration at least six (6) months prior to
the expiration date for his soft body armor. The Municipality may require Police Officers to
wear the body armor while on duty.

7, Prescription Eyeglass Inserts — The Municipality shall (at no cost to the
employee) provide each employee who wears prescription eyewear with a prescription lens insert
designed for the use in the employee’s Department issued protective mask. This shall apply only
to the initial issue of the prescription lens insert. Once the Municipality has paid for the initial
insert, any changes in prescription requiring a new insert shall be a cost assigned to the employee
alone.

ARTICLE XV COURT APPEARANCE

1. Court Appearance — Each officer shall be permitted to appear at all his own
scheduled court cases. Court cases are defined as follows:
1. Arraignments 5. Juvenile Court and Intake Hearings
2. Hearings (criminal and traffic) 6. 302 Commitment Hearings
3. Pre-Trial 7. Civil Court
4, Court (criminal and traffic) 8. LCB Hearings
9, Act 33 Hearings

2. Off Duty Court Appearance Compensation — Each officer when appearing at
any scheduled court case on his regular scheduled off duty time shall be compensated at the
following rate:

Hearings - 2 hours minimum at a time and one-half pay rate
Pre-Trial - 4 hours

Court (criminal and traffic) - 12 hours

Juvenile Court - 12 hours

Intake Hearings - 12 hours

302 Commitment - 4 hours

LCB Hearings - 2 hours

NAW PY No

3. Court Appearance — Each officer shall receive the day off without loss of pay to
appear at the following court cases:
1. Court (criminal, traffic, or civil)
2. Juvenile Court
3. Intake Hearings
4. Act 33 Hearings

ARTICLE XVI GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE AND ARBITRATION
1, In the event of any controversy concerning the meaning or application of any

provision of this contract and/or policy or procedures set forth by the administration, and all
matters of discipline, there shall be no suspension of work, but such controversy shall be treated

{DocNo=00457489.1 }
as a grievance and shall be settled, if possible, in the simplest and most direct manner, by the
Wage Policy Committee and the Municipality in the following manner:

STEP ONE: Any grievance submitted by a member of the Police Department must be
presented to the Wage Policy Committee in writing and must be filed no later than fifteen
(15) working days following the date the cause of the grievance occurs or knowledge of
its occurrence. The Wage Policy committee shall then present the grievance to the Chief
of Police or his designee.

STEP TWO: The Chief of Police or his designee shall answer the grievance in writing
within seven (7) working days from the date of its submission to him.

STEP THREE: If the grievance is not settled satisfactorily to all parties the matter shall
be presented to the Municipal Manager or his designee for resolution. The Manager or
his designee shall meet with the Wage Policy Committee no later than seven (7) working
days from the date of its submission to him. The Manager or his designee shall then
report his findings to the Wage Policy Committee in writing within seven (7) days of said
meeting.

STEP FOUR: A. If the dispute or grievance is not settled in the third step, the matter
shall be submitted to binding arbitration. The Wage Policy Committee shall as soon as
possible, but within twenty (20) working days after the reply was given in the third step,
present in writing to the Municipal Manager the name of its arbitrator. The Manager
shall within seven (7) days following receipt of said appointment submit in writing the
name of its arbitrator to the Wage Policy Committee. The parties will present a joint
statement in writing as to the matter to be submitted to arbitration. The two (2)
arbitrators so selected shall meet as soon as passible and endeavor to agree on a
settlement of the matter in dispute. If settlement by the two (2) arbitrators is not agreed to
within five (5) working days they shall endeavor to select a third arbitrator within the next
five (5) working days. Should the two (2) arbitrators be unable to agree on a third
arbitrator within the time limit specified, then the parties shal] jointly request the
American Arbitration Association to furnish a list of three (3) arbitrators from among
whom the third arbitrator shall be selected. It shall be the responsibility of the
Municipality to make the first “strike” when selecting the third arbitrator.

B. The three (3) arbitrators so selected shall constitute the Board of Arbitration,
shall meet at the earliest possible date, shail review the matter in dispute, and shall make
their findings and reach their conclusions as expeditiously as possible. The Board of
Arbitration in making findings and reaching conclusions shall confine such findings and
conclusions to the matter, which was submitted to the Board in writing. The arbitrator
shall have no power to add to or subtract from, or modify any terms of this agreement.
The findings made or conclusions reached by a majority of the arbitrators shall be
submitted to the parties in writing and shall be final and binding upon the parties and the
aggrieved.

{DocNo=00457489 1 }
C. The Wage Policy Committee and the aggrieved party shall be allowed the
necessary time off, without loss of scheduled pay to attend grievance meetings. The
expense of any salary incident to the services of the third arbitrator and all general
expenses of the board shall be as provided in Act 111 of June 24, 1968.

2. The Wage Policy Committee and members of the Palice Department covered by
this Agreement agree that as long as this agreement is in effect there shall be no strikes, sit-
downs, concerted slowdowns, stoppages of work, boycotts or any unlawful acts that interfere
with the Municipality's operations and with the public safety of the citizens of the Municipality.
Any violation of the foregoing may be the subject of disciplinary action, including discharge,
subject to all existing laws.

3. Any grievance not acted upon within the time limits prescribed under this Article
shall be deemed to be conceded by the party failing to act within said time limits, unless such
time limit has been extended by mutual agreement in writing. Under no circumstances will the
failure to meet the prescribed time limits be construed by either party as having established a
precedent.

4. The Municipality and Wage Policy Committee shall split grievance costs 50/50.
5. The grievance procedure is limited to active employees only.

6. All claims or disputes relating to a Police Officer’s entitlement to benefits under
the Heart and Lung Act, 53 P.S. §637 et seg., may be pursued in the contractual grievance
arbitration process or through a Local Agency hearing, but not both. In the event a police officer
elects to process a claim or dispute relating to a Police Officer’s entitlement to benefits under the
Heart and Lung Act through the grievance process set forth herein, he/she shall be foreclosed
from pursing same through a Local Agency hearing and vice versa.

ARTICLE XVII SAFETY AND HEALTH

1. The Wage Policy Committee agrees to the Municipality of Monroeville’s Safety
Manual Ordinance #1934 as amended.

2. All employees shall be subject to drug/alcohol random testing. Such testing shall
be in accordance with guidelines as established in the Drug and Alcohol Testing Ordinance.

ARTICLE XVII. PAST PRACTICE
1, All existing working conditions, understandings, existing benefits, and past

practices previously enjoyed by members of the Bargaining Unit not modified by this agreement,
shall remain "AS IS".

(DocNto=00457489.) }
ARTICLE XIX DURATION AND TERMINATION

1. This Agreement shall become effective as of January 1, 2019 and shall remain in
effect up to and including midnight, December 31, 2022.

{DocNo~00457489.1 j
APPENDIX A

WAGES
Effective January 1, 2019, the base annual wage includes a 3% wage increase from 2018 based on the top patrolman
rate.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2019 Hourly Yearly __ |

Lieutenant $55.89 $116,251.20
Sergeant $54.89 $114,171.20
Corporal $53.89 $112,091.20
Top Patrolman $51.89 $107,931.20
Step E $46.70 $97,136.00
Step D1 $44.11 $91,748.80
Step D $41.51 $86,340.80
Step Cl $38.92 $80,953.60
Step C $36.32 $75,545.60
Step B $31.13 $64,750.4

Step A $25,00 $52,000

 

Effective January 1, 2020, the base annual wage includes a 2.75% wage increase from 2019 based on the top
patrolman rate.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2020 Hourly Yearly
Lieutenant $57.32 $119,225.60
Sergeant $56.32 $117,145.60
Corporal $55.32 $115,065.60
Top Patrolman $53.32 $110,905.60
Step E $47.99 $99,819.20
Step D1] $45.32 $94,265.60
Step D $42.66 $88,723.80
Step Cl $39.99 $83,179.20
Step C $37.32 $77,625.60
Step B $31.99 $66,539.20
Step A $25.00 $52,000

 

 

{DocNo=00457489.1 }
Effective January 1, 2021, the base annual wage includes a 3% wage increase from 2020 based on the top patrolman

rate.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

2021 Hourly Yearly
Lieutenant $58.92 $122,553.60
Sergeant $57.92 $120,473.60
Corporal $56.92 $118,393.60
Top Patrolman $54.92 $114,233.60
Step E $49.43 $102,814.40
Step DI $46.68 $97,094.40
Step D $43.94 $91,395.20
Step C1 $41.19 $85,675.20
Step C $38.44 $79,955.20
Step B $32.95 $68,536.00
Step A $25.00 $52,000.00

 

Effective January 1, 2022, the base annual wage includes a 3% wage increase from 2021 based on the top patrolman

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

rate.
2022 Hourly Yearly
Lieutenant $60.57 $125,985.60
Sergeant $59.57 $123,905.60
Corporal $58.57 $121,825.60
Top Patrolman $56.57 $117,665.60
Step E $50.91 $105,892.80
Step Di $48.08 $100,006.40
Step D $45.26 $94,140.80
Step Cl $42.43 $88,254.40
Step C $39.60 $82,368.00
| Step B $33.94 $70,595.20
| Step A $25.00 $52,000.00

 

 

(DocNo=00457489.1 }

 

 
ATTEST:

antl, | £004

Timothy J. Littld/ U7
Municipal Manager

WAGE POLICY COMMITTEE:

Widest
wonom

he an Whalen

DA pgs
JE

Skaggs

(DocNo=00457489 | |

MUNICIPALITY OF MONROEVILLE

Aime

Dr. Nicholas J>Gresock
Mayor
