(

POLICE LABOR CONTRACT

JANUARY 1, 2017 - DECEMBER 31, 2019
BETWEEN

(

THE BOROUGH OF EDGEWOOD
AND

TEAMSTERS LOCAL UNION NO. 205

(

Table of Contents
ARTICLE I - RECOGNITION ....................................................................................................... 1
ARTICLE II - MANAGEMENT ..................................................................................................... I
ARTICLE III - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE ................................................................................ 2
ARTICLE IV - UNION STEWARD ............................................................................................... 3
ARTICLE V - COMPENSATORY TIME AND TRAINING TJME ............................................. 3
ARTICLE VI - MILITARY DUTY AND JURY DUTY .............................................................. .4
ARTICLE VII - HOURS OF WORK AND SIIIFT DIFFERENTIAL ........................................... 5
ARTICLE VIII - SALARY, LONGEVITY AND CALL BACKS ................................................. 6
ARTICLE IX - COURT APPEARANCE TIME - CRIMINAL DISTRICT JUSTICE AND
CIVIL ............................................................................................................................................... 7
ARTICLE X - I-IOLJDJ\YS ............................................................................................................. 8
ARTICLE XI - UNIFORM ALLO\.VANCE................................................................................... 8
ARTICLE XII - HOSPITALIZATl ON AND LIFE INSURANCE ................................................ 9
ARTICLE XIII - VACATION ...................................................................................................... 12
(

ARTICLE XIV - SICK LEAVE .................................................................................................... 13
ARTICLE XV - LEAVE OF ABSENCE ...................................................................................... 14
ARTICLE XVI - PERSONAL PROPERTY ................................................................................. 15
ARTICLE XVII - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ................................................................ I 5
ARTICLE XVIII - PENSION PLAN ............................................................................................ 16
ARTICLE XIX - MAINTENANCE OF MEMBERSHIP ............................................................. 17
ARTICLE XX - DUES CHECK-OFF ........................................................................................... 18
ARTICLE XXI - SENIORITY ...................................................................................................... 18
ARTICLE XXII - TERM OF AGREEMENT ............................................................................... 18

(

(

AGREEMENT
This AGREEI\'IENT is made and entered into as of the ____
day of ______
, 2016,
between the BOROUGH OF EDGE\VOOD, a municipal co1voration, organized and existing
under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, hereinafter designated as the "Borough",
and the TEAMSTERS LOCAL UNION NO. 205, hereinafter designated as "the Union."

\VITNESSETH
\VHEREAS, the parties desire to establish a standard of wages and other conditions under which
the Police Officers of the Borough of Edgewood shall work for the Borough of Edgewood during
the term of the Agreement; and
WHEREAS, the parties desire to set forth in writing their Agreement achieved through
collective bargaining; and

l

WHEREAS, it is the intent and purpose of the pm1ies hereto that this Agreement promote and
improve the quality of public service to the citizens of the Borough of Edgewood, and that there
shall be uninterrupted service to the community.
NOW, THEREFORE, in consideration of the mutual covenants hereinafter set forth, it ts
agreed by and between the parties as follows:

(

ARTICLE I - RECOGNITION
Teamsters Local Union No. 205, affiliated with the International Brotherhood of Teamsters, is
the exclusive representative of the employees of Borough of Edgewood Police Department for
the purpose of collective bargaining with respect to wages, hours and other terms and conditions
of employment, for the bargaining unit certified by the PLRB as:
All full-time and regular pm1-time police officers including but not limited to sergeants and
patrol officers; and excluding the Chief of Police and any other managerial employees. PF-R10-67-W (PF-R-83-41-W).

ARTICLE II - MANAGEMENT
Section 2.1
The management of the Borough of Edgewood Police Department and the
direction of its working force is vested solely in the Borough of Edgewood acting through its
Chief of Police, Mayor, Council, and/or Civil Service Commission, and shall include, but shall
not be limited to the right to hire, classify, promote, suspend, discipline, discharge, schedule
shifts, alter shifts, establish working hours, and control the right to use any or all Borough
equipment of the Borough of Edgewood, except where expressly abridged by a specific
provision of the Agreement.

(

· Section 2.2
This Agreement is subject to the rights and responsibilities of the Civil Service
Commission, but it is agreed that no Police Officer shall be transferred, demoted, or disciplined

(

for arbitrary or capricious reasons, and shall not be discriminated against by either party because
of his participation or non-participation in the collective bargaining process.
ARTICLE Ill - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

Section 3.1
It is the intent of the grievance procedure to promote good lines of
communication between the Edgewood Borough Council, the Public Safety Committee, the
Mayor, the Police Chief, and the Police Officers. There is no intent to subject any Police Officer
to retribution of reprisals because of grievance filing.
Section 3.2
A grievance is limited to a complaint or request of a Police Officer which
involves the interpretation or application of or compliance with the existing agreements between
the Borough and the Union.
Section 3.3
The grievance procedure shall be an internal procedure between the Union and
the Mayor, Edgewood Borough Council, Borough Solicitor, or others on the Edgewood
Borough payroll. The aggrieved Officer shall be pennittecl outside representation, at no cost to
the Borough, including legal representation, upon completion of Step I of the Grievance
Process.
One grievance representative, who shall be an active member of the Edgewood Police Force,
shall be selected by the Police Officers.

(

All grievance discussions and other grievance activities in all steps shall be restricted to the offduty time of the Police Officers and grievance representative.
Section 3.4
Step l - Any Police Officer who believes he has a justifiable grievance or complaint shall reduce
the grievance to writing and discuss the alleged grievance with the Police Chief or his designee,
with or without the grievance representative present, as the Police Officer may elect, within ten
(I 0) clays after the occurrence, in an attempt to settle same. The Police Chief shall answer the
grievance in writing within five (5) clays.
Step 2 - In the event that no satisfactory settlement is reached in Step I, the grievance shall be
referred by the grievance representative within ten ( I 0) days after the Step I answer to the
Mayor, who\vill consult with the Chairman of the Public Safety Committee. The answer to the
grievance will be subject to the approval of the Chainnan of the Public Safety Committee and
will be rendered within ten ( I 0) days.
Step 3 - In the event that no satisfactory settlement is reached in Step 2, the Union, within ten
( I 0) days after the Step 2 answer, shall refer the grievance to the Edgewood Borough Council,
who shall answer the grievance following the earliest practicable opportunity to call a meeting of
a quorum of the Council. The Step 3 answer to the grievance shall be made within ten ( l 0) days
of this meeting. "Days" within the meaning of this A11icleshall exclude Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays.
2

I
l

Step 4 - In the event that a satisfactory adjustment cannot be reached between the patiies as
stated above, the matter shall be submitted to binding arbitration. The Union shall, in writing,
notify the Mayor within seven (7) days from the Step 3 answer that they demand to arbitrate the
dispute. The arbitrator shall be selected as follows: The parties shall attempt to agree on selection
of the arbitrator. [f the parties are unable to agree on an arbitrator within five (5) days after
arbitration has been demanded, then either party may request the Pennsylvania Bureau of
Mediation, or its successor, to furnish a list of seven (7) prospective arbitrators who are residents
of the Commonwealth of Pctrnsylvania, from which list the arbitrator shall be selected. Both
parties shall strike one (I) name, and the remaining name on the list shall be designated the
arbitrator. The expenses of the impartial arbitrator shall be shared equally by the patiies. There
shall be no suspensions or refusal to work during the negotiations or arbitration. A decision of
the arbitrator shall be final and binding on the parties to this Agreement and the aggrieved. The
arbitrator shall not have the authority to modify, acid to or delete any of the provisions of this
Agreement.

(

ARTICLE IV- UNION STEWARD

Section 4.1
The Employer recognizes the right of the Union to designate Job Stewards and
alternates. The authority of Job Stewards and alternates so designated by the Union shall be
limited and shall not exceed the following duties and activities:
a) Investigation and presentation of grievances in accordance with the prov1s1ons of the
Collective Bargaining Agreement.
b) The transmission of such messages and infonnation which shall originate with and are
authorized by the Local Union or its Officers provided such messages and information.
1) Have been reduced to writing; or

2) If not reduced to writing, are of a routine nature and do not involve work stoppage,
slowdowns or refusal to obey orders, or any other interference with the Employer's
business.
Section 4.2
Job Stewards and alternates have no authority to take strike action or any other
action interrupting the Employer's business.
Section 4.3
The Employer recognizes these limitations upon the authority of the job stewards
and their alternates and shall not hold the Union liable for any unauthorized acts. The Employer
in so recognizing such limitations shall have authority to impose proper discipline, including
discharge, in the event that the Job Steward has taken unauthorized strike action, slowdown
activity, or any work stoppage or work interference, or has acted in a manner indicating his
approval of same, violation of this Agreement.
ARTICLE V - COMPENSATORY

(

Section 5.1

TIME AND TRAINING TIME

Ove1iime pay shall not be received by any Police Officer for time involved
3

Ill

part1c1pation in trammg programs, attendance at the Police Academy, and other training and
schooling activities, except where paid for by an agency other than the Borough.

(

Section 5.2
Each Police Officer shall be granted compensatory time at a rate of time and onehalf (I ½). A police officer may accrue up to a maximum of eighty (80) hours of compensatory
time. Compensatory time may be canied over from year to year by officers. Compensatory time
off is only granted for Training time, Edgewood Borough Community Day and related duties or
activities, Halloween Community Parade or related activities, and the Citizens Police Academy.
Compensatory time will not be granted for special details. Officers who have been designated as
the OIC (Officer in charge) by the Chief of Police, and are not the rank of Sergeant, will accrue
eight (8) hours of compensatory time per month. Compensatory time off requests must be made
in a timely fashion to the Chief of Police. Officer's request and usage of compensatory time
cannot cause overtime, or be used on a holiday. Compensatory time usage will be approved or
denied by the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police will keep all records relating to
Compensatory time for officers. Upon termination of employment for any reason, an officer will
be paid for all unused compensatory time.

(

Section 5.3
An Officer attending training or schooling approved by the Borough shall be paid
mileage equivalent to that of the Internal Revenue Service's mileage rating chart at the time in
which these miles were driven by that Officer. Use of an individual Officer's vehicle shall be
permitted only when a Borough vehicle is not available for that Officer's use; mileage calculated
when the use of an Officer's vehicle is needed shall commence and terminate at the Borough
Police Station located in the Borough Building unless otherwise mutually agreed upon by the
Officer and the Borough. The Borough shall pay a maximum of five hundred ($500.00) dollars
per year to reimburse officers for the cost of any training which is needed to maintain required
ccrti fication for fircarms/Tazcr instruction approved by the Borough.
Section 5.4
At such times when an Officer is attending a Borough approved training or
schooling course that extends beyond four (4) hours for that particular day, the Officer shall be
compensated with a lunch allowance of up to five dollars ($5.00) for that clay provided that the
Officer presents a receipt to the Borough for his lunch expenses. In such cases where a Borough
approved training or schooling extends beyond eight (8) hours for a particular day, a meal
allowance of up to twelve dollars (£12.00) per clay will be provided to that Officer provided that
the Officer presents the Borough with a receipt for his expenses.
Section 5.5
The provisions of the A1ticle shall not be applicable to training or schooling
activities which are paid by some agency other than the Borough.
ARTICLE VI- MILITARY DUTY AND JURY DUTY

(

Section 6.1
All police officers of the Borough of Edgewood who are members, either enlisted
or commissioned, of any reserve component of the United States Anny, Navy, Marine Corps.,
Air Force or Coast Guard, shall be entitled to leave of absence from their respective duties
without loss of pay, time, or efficiency rating on all days not exceeding fifteen ( 15) in any one
year during which they shall, as members of such reserve components, be engaged in the active
service of the United States or in field training ordered or authorized by the federal forces.
4

(

Section 6.2
A full-time Officer who performs jury duty shall be paid the difference between
his full rate of pay as an Officer for each day that he performs jury duty and the amount paid to
him for performance of such jury duty.

ARTICLE VII - HOURS OF \\'ORK AND SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL
Section 7.1
The normal hours of work and shifts scheduled for a Police Officer shall be forty
(40) hours in the work week, inclusive of a half-hour lunch period.
Section 7.2
All hours worked in excess of forty (40) in a work week or eight (8) in a work day
shall constitute ovetiime and shall be paid at a rate of one and one-half (I ½) times the regular
annual salary divided by two thousand and eighty (2080) hours. There shall be no duplication or
pyramiding in the computation of overtime and other premium pay and nothing in the Agree1nent
shall be construed to require the payment of overtime or other premium pay more than once for
the same hours worked.
Section 7.3
A minimum of two (2) Police Officers shall be on duty at all times. Full time
Officers will work steady shifts without a split for the entire week. The scheduling of work shifts
is vested solely with the Borough and shall be determined and/or altered by the Borough on an as
needed basis. The shift schedule shall provide for a minimum of sixteen ( I 6) consecutive hours
off between shifts and a minimum of forty-eight (48) consecutive hours off for pass clays for
each scheduled Officer unless otherwise agreed upon by the Officer and the Borough. Shift duty
assignments shall not under any circumstances be made for disciplinary or punitive purposes. For
the purpose of this section, shift or clay changes made to improve supervision or job perfonnancc
shall not be considered as made for disciplinary or punitive purposes.
Section 7.4
The occasional exchanging or switching of shifts among the members of the
Department shall be permitted in only those cases where it is mutually agreed upon by the
officers involved with the shift exchange and subject to the Boroughs' prior approval, which
approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. Any exchange or switching of shifts that initiates
an overtime circumstance is strictly prohibited. Officers may voluntarily switch shifts for
educational purposes, if both officers agree and with the approval of the Chief of Police.
st

(

Section 7.5
On or about December 1 of each year the Chief of Police will post a schedule for
the following calendar year. The Chief has the right to determine the number of police officer
assigned to each shift and also to dctennine pass clays, including the shifts and pass days for
Sergeants. Once the Chief posts the schedule, police officers will have the right to bid on a shift
and pass clays, in order of seniority. This schedule will remain in effect for that calendar year.
However, the Chief of Police has the right to change shifts, at his discretion, by giving a police
officer seven (7) clays notice, unless the Chief needs to make a schedule change more quickly in
order to cover a shift, when no pati-time officers are available. The Borough reserves the right to
change this arrangement in order to address issues which may arise. However, the Borough will
give the police officers thi11y (30) days notice and will meet with the police officers to discuss
this matter prior to making any change. Otherwise, this arrangement will continue on a year to
year basis.

5

(
Section 7.6
During the term of this Agreement, a shift differential in the amount of one
($1.00) dollar per hour shall be paid to full-time Officers working other than the "A" shift (7:00
a.m. to 3:00 p.m.).

ARTICLE VIII - SALARY, LONGEVITY AND CALL BACKS
Section 8.1
a) The regular rate of pay for full-time Police Officers shall be as follows:

Rank
Sergeant
Hourly
Patrolman l
(6 years or more)
Hourly

(

Effective
January I, 201 7

Effective
January L 2018

Effective
January I, 2019

$79,164.80

$81,140.80

$83,574.40

$38.06

$39.01

$40.18

$75,670.40

$77,563.20

$79,892.80

$36.38

$37.29

$38.41

b) Newly hired full-time police officers will be paid a percentage of the Patrolman 1 annual
salary in accordance with the following schedule:

0-1
1-2
2-3
3-4
4-5
5-6
6+

During the probation period
A ftcr one full year of employment
After two full years of employment
After three full years of employment
After four full years of employment
After five full years of employment
After six full years of employment

70%
75%
80%
85%
90%
95%
100%

c) During the term of this Agreement, part-time patrol officers shall be paid in accordance
with the following schedule:
Effective
January 1, 2017
Less than 500
hours of service
with the Borough
500
or
more
hours of service
with the Borough

Effective
January I, 2018

Effective
January 1, 20 I 9

$15.07/hr.

S15.45/hr.

$15.91/hr.

Sl 6.23/hr.

S 16.64/hr.

S17.14/hr.

(
6

(

Section 8.2
LONGEVITY: Each full-time Police Officer hired on or before December 31,
2001 shall be entitled to receive longevity pay in addition to his or her regular salary at the
following rates:
After one full year of service
After two full years of service
After three full years of service
After five full years of service
Aft er ten fu11years of servi cc
After twenty full years of service

I% of annual salary
2% of airnual salary
3% of annual salary
5% of annual salary
6% of annual salary
7% of annual salary

For full-time officers hired after January I, 2002, the following longevity schedule shall apply:
After three years of employment
3% of annual salary
Alter five full years of employment 5% of annual salary
Full-Time officers hired after January I, 2017, shall not be entitled to longevity pay.
Longevity pay shall be capped at an annual maximum of four thousand ($4,000) dollars for
current officers.

(

Section 8.3
Where a Police Officer has been relieved of duty for the clay and is called back to
duty, his call back time shall be for a minimum of four (4) hours at the appropriate rate of pay for
such call back time. An Officer may be assigned to other duties during the call-back period. Call
back will not be used to reduce an Officer's scheduled hours of work. Where a Police Officer is
called back to duty after he has been relieved of duty for the clay in order to attend a meeting
with the Mayor, Police Chief, other superior Officers, or other agents acting for the Borough, his
call back time shall be for a minimum of one (I) hour at the appropriate rate of pay. An Officer
shall not be paid if he is called back for a disciplinary meeting or disciplinary purposes.
Section 8.4 Extra Duty Details - Full-time officers will receive overtime at the rate of one and
one-half ( l ½) times his or her base hourly rate for extra duty details. The Borough, in its
discretion, may charge the person or entity requesting an extra duty detail and administrative
charge in excess of the amount paid to the police officer. All extra duty overtime opportunities
shall be filled by utilizing the full-time officer seniority list on a round robin basis. If no full-time
officer is available, only then the part-time seniority list shall be utilized.
When an outside entity, specifically for traffic details and the movie industry, hires an off duty
officer for an extra duty detail, the officer shall be compensated at a minimum of time and onehalf (l ½) the rate of pay for the Sergeant. All other details shall be at the officer's regular
overtime rate.
ARTICLE IX- COURT APPEARANCE TIME - CRIMINAL DISTRICT JUSTICE AND
CIVIL

Section 9.1

Whenever a full-time police officer appears on behalf of the Borough in any
7

criminal proceeding before a District Magistrate, the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny
County, or any other court of competent jurisdiction, during his or her off-duty hours, the
Borough shall pay the full-time police officer overtime at the rate of one and one-half times his
or her base hourly rate for all hours achtally worked. For off-duty court time, there will be a
minimum of two hours for attendance at a hearing or hearings before a District Magistrate and a
minimum of four hours for attendance at any other criminal com1 of higher jurisdiction.
Verification of the hours of attendance at said criminal cou11 proceedings must be submitted to
the Borough.

(

The Borough agrees to reimburse a police officer for parking fees inct11Tedin connection with a
downtown criminal court appearance, not to exceed fifteen($ I 5.00) dollars per clay.

ARTICLE X - HOLIDAYS
Section I 0.1

Each full time employee shall be entitled to holidays as follows:
New Year's Day
Martin Luther King Day
President's Day
Good Friday
Memorial Day

(

Independence Day
Labor Day
Thanksgiving
Day After Thanksgiving
Christmas Day

Section 10.2 For each holiday, payment at the full-time Officer's straight time hourly rate shall
be made to each Officer in the first pay in December of the calendar year in which the holiday
was observed. If an officer calls off, for any reason, on the day of a holiday, the officer shall not
receive holiday pay for that day.
Section 10.3 Each full-time Police Officer will receive two (2) personal clays each year, one
(I) of which shall be his/her birthday and the other to be selected by the Officer. The Officer
will give the Borough as much advance notice of the personal clay selected as reasonably
possible. lf a personal clay has not been taken during the calendar year, it may be bought back
from the Borough at the same hourly rate of pay under Section l 0.2 above. Probationary
employees shall not be entitled to personal days during the probationary period.
Section I 0.4 Part-time officers shall be compensated at time and one half ( I ½) for all hours
worked on a holiday.

ARTICLE XI - UNIFORM ALLO\VANCE

(

Section I I. I Unifonn allowance will be provided to each full-time Officer, in accordance with
the Police Department Uniform Code, in the amount of seven hundred seventy-five ($775.00)
dollars in 2017, eight hundred twenty-five ($825.00) dollars in 2018, and eight hundred seventyfive ($875.00) dollars in 20 I 9, to be allotted on an as-needed basis, subject to approval by
purchase order and a clothing receipt and/or sales slip by the Officer. A uni form maintenance
allowance in the amount of six hundred ($600.00) dollars per year will be provided to each fullst
time Officer. The uniform maintenance allowance will be paid the l pay of December.

8

(
Section 11.2 Funds for the uni form allowance sh al I be appropriated and drawn on a per item
basis upon a properly executed purchase order which has first been reviewed and approved by
the Chief of Police. Said purchase of clothing under this provision shall be in strict conformance
with the prescribed Departmental Uniform Code.
Section 11.3 The purchase of items other than as-prescribed in the aforementioned Uniform
Code shall be at the Officer's personal expense and the wearing of such uniform while on duty
shall be condoned only with the pe1111issionof the Chief of Police.
Section 11.4 The Borough will provide Bulletproof Vests at the Borough's expense to all fulltime officers of a type mutually agreed-to from a mutually agreed-to vendor. Parties agree that it
is mandatory that the Bulletproof Vest be worn whenever the police officer is on duty, including
extra duty of any type.
Section 11.5 Any police officer whose employment with the Borough is terminated during his
or her probationary period, for any reason, shall return to the Borough all property and
equipment which was furnished by the Borough to the Police officer during the officer's
employment, including any clothing, property or equipment which was purchased by the officer
with the officer's uniform allowance. Expenditures for uniforms after an officer is eligible to
retire or has given notice of his or her intent to resign from employment with the Borough shall
require specific approval of the Chief of Police.

(

Section 11.6 Newly hired part-time officers shall be provided a uniform allowance of two (2)
sho1t sleeve shirts, two (2) long sleeve shirts, and two (2) pair of uni fonn pants. At the
completion of one (I) year of service, each part-time officer shall receive a three hundred
(£300.00) dollar per year uniform purchase allowance.
Part-time officers will be responsible for the cost of a bulletproof vest for the first five (5) years
of employment. After five (5) years of employment, the Borough will pay one-half ( 1/2) the cost
of the bulletproof vest. After ten (10) years of employment, the Borough will pay all the cost of
said part-time officer's bulletproof vest. A new vest shall be provided every five (5) years upon
expiration date of the vest.

ARTICLE XII - HOSPITALIZATION AND LIFE INSURANCE
Section 12.1 The Borough will provide a zero deductible ten (S 10.00) dollar co-pay plan
through Highmark and UPMC plans through MBS. The employee can choose either Highmark
or UPMC. The Borough will pay the premium for the less expensive plan, and the employee
will pay the difference for the more expensive plan, in addition to the employee's health care
contribution in the following manner:

(
9

Base Salar}'.

(

Base Salary up to $34,999
$35,000-$35,999
$36,000-$36,999
$3 7,000-$3 7,999
$38,000-$38,999
$39,000-$39,999
$40,000-$40,999
$41,000-$41,999
$42,000-$42,999
$43,000-$43,999
S44,000-$44,999
$45,000-$45,999
$46,000-$46, 999
S47,000-S47,999
$48,000-$48,999
$49,000-$49,999
$50,000-$50,999
S51,000-$51, 999
$52,000 and above
(

l/l/2017
5.5%
5.75%
6.00%
6.25%
6.50%
6.75%
7.00%
7.25%
7.50%
7.75%
8.00%
8.25%
8.50%
8.75%
9.00%
9.25%
9.50%
9.75%
10.00%

Percentage of Premium
l/l/2018
l/ 1/2019
6.5%
7.5%
6.75%
7.75%
7.00%
8.00%
7.25%
8.25%
7.50%
8.50%
7.75%
8.75%
8.00%
9.00%
8.25%
9.25%
8.50%
9.50%
8.75%
9.75%
9.00%
10.00%
9.25%
10.25%
9.50%
10.50%
9.75%
I 0.75%
10.00%
11.00%
10.25%
11.25%
10.50%
I 1.50%
10.75%
11.75%
11.00%
12.00%

Section 12.2 The Borough will set up the appropriate program to collect officer premium
contributions on a pre-tax basis.
Section 12.3 Officers may elect to receive a cash benefit as an alternative to medical coverage
provided they have given the Borough verification that they have other health insurance
coverage. Officers who elect the cash alternative will receive sixty percent (60%) of the
premium cost of Single Coverage under the health care plan that is in effect at the time. (See
Section 11.5) Officers will have the option of reinstating benefits once each year m January with
at least forty-five clays written notice to the Borough; or, [f the employee's spouse dies, is
terminated from health care coverage, or divorces, and such occurrences leave the employee
without available health care benefits. Should an employee elect to forego health care coverage
provided by the Borough, the employee shall execute .a re/ease form provided by the Borough
opting to forego such coverage. This option of foregoing health insurance coverage shall only be
made available to the employee should the Borough's insurance carriers not require onehundred percent ( 100%) employee participation under insurance policies.

(

Section 12.4 Formation of Health Care Committee - The Borough and the Union agree to the
fonnation of a Health Care Committee. Unless otherwise agreed, Borough Council and the
Police Officers shall each designate two members to serve on the Health Care Committee. The
Borough Manager shall also be a member of the Health Care Committee. The pu1vose of the
Committee shall be to review optional health care carriers, plans and coverages and to make
recommendations concerning any changes in health care carriers, plans or coverages. The
Borough shall have the right to change health care carriers or plans provided that comparable

10

(

health care coverage is provided. Before the Borough changes any health care carriers or plans,
the Borough will provide the Union with notice of any proposed health care caniers or plans,
and the Borough will give the Health Care Committee a reasonable opportunity to review and
proposed health care carriers or plans and to make recommendations relating thereto. As part of
this process, the Union will be given the opportunity to propose other health care carriers or
plans, provided that it does not create an unreasonable delay in the process.
Section 12.5 The Borough will provide
of$75,000.00 in 2017 and shall increase
shall contain a double indemnity clause
time Officers. Probationary employees
probationary period.

and pay for a group life insurance policy in the amount
to $80,000.00 in 2018 and $85,000.00 in 2019, which
for accidental death and dismcmbennent, for all fullshall not be entitled to life insurance during the

Section 12.6 The Borough will continue to provide the present long-term disability insurance
program for full-time Police Officers who have completed their probationary period.
Section 12.7 A paid-up $3,500.00 life insurance policy with a Certification of Coverage will
be provided each full-lime Officer upon retirement.

l

(

Section 12.8 The Borough shall provide for the dental benefits through the Borough's
provider. The Borough shall provide and pay for the dental plan and Vision Care Program
cunently provided or equivalent coverage on an annual basis for each full-time Officer and his
or her dependents.
Section 12.9 For full-time officers hired prior to January I, 2007, upon retirement of a full-time
Officer, the Borough wi II pay for the same individual medical, dental and vision benefits, as
provided to non-retired full-time Officers until eligibility for Medicare or age 65, whichever
comes first. Full-lime officers hired after January I, 2007 will be provided with an ICMA health
savings account sponsored by the Borough of Edgewood. Full-time officers hired before January
I, 2007 many also receive this benefit, but must 'opt out' of the single coverage at retirement
benefit, in writing, by December 31, 2006. For each participating fil I-time officer the Borough
will contribute five hundred seventy-five (S575) dollars per year to the ICMA health savings
account.
Section 12. l O All full-time Officers are required to undergo an annual physical examination at a
medical facility selected by the Borough al the expense of the Borough. Results of the physical
examination will be reviewed by the Borough and placed in the Police Officer's personnel file.
Section 12.11 General Physical Examination for current full-time Police Officers. General
physical to include Height and Weight comparison with recommendations to be handled
personally by the Officer at Officer's own risk with the option of following the recommendations
with the assistance of the Borough.

(

a) Annual Vision - Officer's choice under the current vision insurance plan. The Borough
will provide insurance for an annual vision examination.

II

b) General Physical to include weight recommendations in accordance with Police Officer's
height.
c) EKG
cl) Treadmill

e) Random Drug Testing
Section 12.12 If the Borough receives notice or infonnation indicating that its health care plan
costs will subject the plan to the Affordable Care Act's "Cadillac Tax" excise tax, the Borough
will give the Union written notice of the fact and the paities will immediately meet to discuss
changes in the plan design, plan and/or plan carrier in order to avoid the imposition of the tax. If
no agreement is reached within fourteen ( 14) days of the Borough's written notice to the Union
regarding this issue, then the parties will proceed to an expedited arbitration proceeding with an
arbitrator selected pursuant to the terms of the Collective Bargaining Agreement's b1-rievance and
arbitration procedure. The sole purpose for the expedited arbitration proceeding will be for the
arbitrator to modify the plan, plan design and/or carrier in order to eliminate the exposure to the
Cadillac Tax. The decision of the arbitrator on this issue shall be issued within forty-five (45)
claysof the Borough's written notice that the plan is subject to the Cadillac Tax.
ARTICLE XIII - VACATION

Section I 3.1 Each full-time Police Officer shall be entitled to the following paid vacation upon
the anniversary date of his completion of the designated years of service. There will be no
vacation during the first year of employment. At the end of the first year, vacation will be
prorated for the remainder of the calendar year.
Ycars of Continued Service

Vacation

One (I) year through five (5) years
Five (5) years plus one (I) clay through ten ( I 0) years
Ten ( I0) years plus one (l) clay through twenty (20) years
Twenty (20) years plus one (I) clay and over

2 weeks
3 weeks
4 weeks
5 weeks

Section 13.2 Vacation pay shall be based upon the Officer's regular rate of pay with one week's
vacation being equivalent to forty (40) hours straight time pay.
Section 13.3 Each full-time Officer is entitled to select his vacation period, subject to the
approval of the Chief of Police. Each employee is entitled to select the period of his two weeks
vacation before any employee in the department may select any additional period. Choice in
selection of a vacation period is detcnninccl by length of employee's continuous service with the
Borough, with the employee in the department having the longest service, having first choice.

(

Section 13.4 The vacation schedule sheet shall be posted prior to March 31 of the year of
selection. In order to have seniority prevail, selections must be made and posted no later than
12

(

June I of the year.
Section 13.5 In the event an Officer is requested to work during any or all of his vacation he
shall be paid straight time for those clays he works, in addition to his vacation pay.
Section 13.6 Vacation clays must be taken in the calendar year in which the Officer is eligible.
Any unused vacation will be paid for, on or before January 31, of the next year, up to a
maximum of one week's vacation pay, unless the Officer has been prevented from taking his
vacation because of disability or illness.
Section 13.7 Part-time officers earn one (I) vacation day for every two hundred and eight (208)
hours worked, up to a maximum of ten ( I 0) clays per year. Vacation shall be used in the calendar
year in which it was earned or within three (3) months thereafter. Vacation not used shall be lost.

ARTICLE XIV - SICK LEA VE
Section 14.1 All full-time Police Officers shall be entitled to fifteen (15) sick days with pay
each calendar year and may accumulate such sick leave for a period not to exceed ninety (90)
clays. Newly hired full-time Officers shall receive three (3) sick clays during their probationary
period. Newly hired full-time Officers shall be awarded one (I) sick day every three (3) months
1
after completion of their third (3" ) month which means they shall receive one (I) day after their
third, sixth and ninth months for a total of three (3) sick days. At the encl of the probationary
period, sick leave will be prorated for the remainder of that calendar year.
Section 14.2 The Borough agrees to pay in the first pay of January of each year, any unused
sick leave clays earned in the previous calendar year in excess of the limit of ninety (90) clays
calculated by multiplying one-half ( 1/2) the number of days unused over 90 by the employee's
regular rate. For example, if at the beginning of a calendar year an employee has a maximum
accumulation of 90 sick clays and only uses five (5) of them, the employee would receive 5 day's
pay in January of the following year, being one-half(l/2) of the unused remaining 10 days times
the regular rate of pay.
Section 14.3 In the case of sick leave exceeding three (3) consecutive days, an Officer may be
required to furnish a signed certificate from the attending physician, or other satisfactory
evidence of illness. If an Officer is required to submit a physician's certificate from other than the
Officer's attending physician, the Borough will pay the cost of such certificate.
Section 14.4
vacation.

Sick leave shall not be paid for in addition to vacation pay during a period of

Section 14.5 Any employee who is injured in the course of his duty and by reason thereof is
temporarily incapacitated from perfonning his duties, shall be paid his full rate of pay until
disability arising from such injury ceases. During the time pay for such temporary disability is
being paid, any worker's compensation received or collected by the employee for such period
shall be deducted from pay then or thereafter becoming clue or owing. This section shall be
interpreted and applied pursuant to the Pennsylvania Heati & Lung Act.

13

Section 14.6 Absence from duty of any Officer by reason of work-related injury as set forth in
Section 14.5 shall not be charged against sick leave allowed such employee.

(

Section 14.7 Subject to compliance, with Civil Service requirements (if applicable) or other
legal requirements, any Officer who is injured in the course of his duty, and by reason thereof is
permanently incapacitated, shall from and after the determination of incapacitation be removed
from employment with the Borough and placed on pernrnncnt disability status.
Section 14.8 All unused sick days can be used at early retirement with full pay, with the option
of being paid at the rate of fifty percent (50%) in one lump sum.
ARTICLE XV - LEA VE OF ABSENCE

Section 15. l
a) The pwvosc of this Section is to comply with the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993
and the Department of Labor Regulations issued pursuant to said Act. In case of conflict
between this Section and the Act and/or Regulations, the Act and Regulations will govern.
b) A family leave of absence is defined as an approved absence available to eligible
employees, which may be for up to twelve ( 12) weeks of unpaid leave within any rolling
twelve (12) month period. This leave may be taken:

(

I) Upon bi 1th of an employee's child;
2) Upon placement of a child with an employee for adoption or foster care;
3) When the employee is needed to care for a child, spouse or parent who has a serious
health condition; or
4) When the employee is unable to perform functions or his/her position because of an
injury, illness, impairment or physical or mental disability.
c) An eligible employee is one who has been employed by the Borough for a least twelve ( 12)
months total, and has worked at least one thousand two hundred and fifty (1250) hours
during the twelve (12) month period preceding the commencement of the leave.
cl) An eligible employee shall also be entitled to receive up to twelve (12) weeks of paid
health care benefits during this leave. The employee must continue to make any copayment for health care benefits.

c) To be eligible for the twelve ( 12) weeks of paid health care, the employee must be an
eligible employee and must utilize all vacation, personal and sick leave time prior to the
twelve (12) week allowance.

(

f) If the reason for a leave is foreseeable, an employee must give thirty (30) clays written prior
14

(

notice. If a need for leave is not foreseeable, the employee must give notice of leave as
soon as practicable.
g) The employee must submit appropriate medical documentation in support of any request
for leave based upon a serious health condition of a family member or the disability of the
employee.
Section 15.2
a) The Public Safety Committee may, with use of reasonable discretion and for unusual
situations only and other than for Family and Medical Leave, authorize leave without pay
and/or benefits.
b) All pay or benefits arc suspended while on non-FUvlA leave, unless the employee arrange
to pay the cost of such benefits, the benefit canier permits the payments, and the payments
arc made in a timely fashion as determined by the Borough.
Bereavement Leave

(

Section 15.3 In the event of a death of a child or spouse of the Police Officer, the Officer may
have the time off not to exceed five (5) consecutive work clays from the time of death until the
day of the funeral. In the event of a death in the immediate family of the Police Officer, the
Officer may have the time off not to exceed three (3) consecutive work clays from the time of
death until the day of the funeral. Immediate family is defined as being a member's, mother,
father, brother, sister, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, daughter-inlaw, son-in-law, grandmother and grandfather. In the event of a death of an aunt, uncle or
granclchilcl, the Officer may take one (I) clay off to attend the funeral.
ARTICLE XVI - PERSONAL PROPERTY

Section 16.1 The Borough will provide reimbursement to a Police Officer whose personal
prope11y is lost, damaged, or destroyed while on duty, up to a maximum of one hundred
(~ 100.00) dollars for any item, if such item was reasonably necessary to the performance of the
Officer's duty. Such payment shall be made within (30) days from the date the payment is
requested by the Officer. If after thirty (30) days, the Police Officer finds the item of personal
which was lost, the Officer shall report this to the Borough and will be requested to reimburse
the Borough for any payment made to the Officer for such lost item.
ARTICLE XVII - I\'IISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Section 17.1 The parties agree that the contract is binding for the stated duration and that the
items agree upon herein may not be reopened during the period of the contract. However,
notwithstanding the aforementioned, the parties will pursue negotiations for a successor
agreement in accordance with the provisions of Act 111 of 1968.
Section 17.2 Should a mutually accepted amendment to this Agreement be negotiated by the
15

)

(

parties, it shall be reduced to writing, and be executed by both parties.
Section 17.3 This Agreement is subject in all respects to the provision of existing or future
laws and regulations including the law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the
regulations of the Civil Service Commission with respect to the powers, rights, duties and
obligations of the Borough, the Police Depa11ment and employees in the bargaining unit, and in
the event that any provision of this Agreement shall at any time be held to the contrary to law by
a court of competent jurisdiction from whose final judgment or decree no appeal has been taken
within the time provided for doing so, such provisions shall be void and inoperative, however, all
other provisions of the Agreement shall continue in effect and the parties shall meet within thirty
(30) clays to negotiate a substitute provision.
Section 17.4 The Borough reserves all rights and powers conferred upon it by the Constitution
and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and of the United States, except as specifically
limited by the Agreement.
Section 17.5 The Borough agrees that Police Officers should not be required to work with or
use facilities or equipment provided by the Borough which are unsafe or hazardous or injurious
to the Officers' safety. If a Police Officer believes a hazardous condition exists, the Officer shall
report the matter to the Officer in charge of the shift who shall make a detennination, or the
Officer may grieve the matter through the grievance procedure.

(

Section 17.6 All terms and conditions of employment agreed to by the parties pursuant to Act
111 or provided by prior Collective Bargaining Agreements not changed or modified by this
Agreement are to remain unchanged throughout the terms of the Agreement.
Section 17.7 All full-time officers are required to reside within twenty (20) air miles of the
Edgewood Borough Building, as a condition of employment.
ARTICLE XVIII - PENSION PLAN

Section 18.1 This Agreement shall not preclude changes in the Police Pension Plan during the
term of this Contract provided those changes can be accomplished legally and are within the
actuarial confines of the law (Acts 600 and 205) and are mutually approved by the Union and
Borough Council.
Section I 8.2 Effective January 1, 1990 the Social Security offset for all full-time Police
Officers under the Borough pension plan will be reduced from twenty-five percent (25%) to zero
percent (0%) offset. For disability pension benefits, there shall be a Social Security offset
pursuant to Act 30 of 2002.

(

Section 18.3 Effective August 7, 1995, Section IX was amended to acid Section 4 of the Police
Pension Ordinance to provide additional compensation of fifty ($50.00) dollars per month for
each year of service over 25 years to a maximum of one hundred ($100.00) dollars per month in
accordance with Act 600.
16

Section 18.4 Effective August 7, 1995, Section IV, Paragraph I of the police pension ordinance
was amended to increase police contribution to the find from four percent (4%) to five percent
(5%) in accordance with Act 205 guidelines. Full-time police officers shall continue to contribute
five percent (5%) of their wages to the Borough of Edgewood police pension plan.
Section 18.5 Effective January I, 1999, a police pension committee shall be fonned consisting
of up to two (2) working full-time Police Officers selected by the bargaining unit, the Pension
Administrator and up to two (2) members of Borough Council whose elective terms are not
concuJTent. The purpose of the Committee will be to review the police pension plan in November
of each year and make recommendations to Borough Council as mutually agreed upon.
Section 18.6 In accordance with the Bulletin of the Pennsylvania Auditor General, No. 200101, dated July 1, 2001, as amended, lump sum payments received by a full-time police officer
upon retirement shall not be included in final salary, for purposes of calculating the officer's
pension, except to the extent that the amount represents payment for the days or benefits earned,
but unused, during the last thi1ty-six (36) months of employment.
Section 18.7 The Borough and the Police Officers agree that the Borough's Police Pension
Ordinance will be amended so that the Killed-In-Service benefit will comply with Act 51 of
2009 and will be paid for by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
ARTICLE XIX - MAINTENANCE OF MEMBERSHIP

(

Section -19.1 All employees who are members of the Union as of the elate of this Agreement,
and all employees who hereafter become members of the Union shall, as a condition of their
employment, maintain their membership in good standing in the Union for the duration of this
Agreement. Failure of any such person to maintain his membership in good standing as required
herein shall, upon written notice from the Union to the Employer and the employee, cause the
Employer to discharge such person.
Section 19.2. Fair Share
a) All employees who do not become Union members shall as a condition of employment pay
to the Union each month a fair share, an amount equal to the regular monthly clues and
assessments of the Union, as a contribution toward administration of this Agreement.
b) The Employer agrees to deduct the fair share from the first pay each month of said
Employee and forward it to the Union's Secretary-Treasurer on or before the encl of the
month for which the deduction is made.
c) The Union agrees to indemnify and hold hannless the Employer from any and all claims,
suits or other form of liability which may arise as a result of the Employer making the
deductions required under this Atticle.

(
17

(

ARTICLE XX - DUES CHECK-OFF
Section 20.1 The Employer agrees to deduct monthly Union clues, fees and/or unifonn
assessments of the Local Union from the first pay of each month of any employee from whom
written authorization is received and to send such dues to the Secretary-Treasurer of the Union
on or before the end of the month for which the deduction is made. Monthly clues and or fair
share fees shall be owed by pmi-time officers only for those months in which they work at least
thirty two (32) hours.
Section 20.2 A clues check-off authorization is to be voluntary, but once given, it may not be
revoked until fifteen ( 15) clays prior to the expiration of the Agreement.
Section 20.3 The Union agrees to indemnify and save the Employer harmless from any and all
claims, suits, or other forms of liability arising out of deductions of money for Union clues under
this Article.

ARTICLE XXI - SENIORITY
Section 21.1 Seniority shall be defined as the length of continuous service an employee has had
with the Employer from his last elate of hire.

(

Section 21.2 All new employees shall be considered probationary employees for a period of
twelve (12) months from their most recent elate of employment. During an employee's
probationary period, he shall have no rights, whatsoever, under this Agreement, except for the
right to be paid the wage rate specified hereafter and full-time officers shall be entitled to health
insurance benefits after ninety (90) days. A probationary employee may be summarily dismissed
during his probation at the sole discretion of the Employer without being subject to the grievance
procedure defined herein. A probationary employee, upon completion of this probationary
period, shall be entitled to seniority credited retroactive to his most recent date of employment.
Section 21.3 Layoffs shall be made first from among part-time employees, in inverse order of
seniority, and then from among full-time employees, in inverse order of seniority.

ARTICLE XXII - TERM OF AGREEMENT
Section 22. l The term of this Agreement shall begin on January I, 2017 and shall continue in
Cull force and effect until midnight, December 31, 2019, and shall thereatler renew automatically
for one (I) year periods unless either party gives written notice to the other in accordance with
Act 111 of 1968, of its intention to modify or terminate this Agreement.

(
18

IN WITNESS WHEREOF and intending to be legally found hereby, the parties hereto have

caused this instrument to be duly executed by their authorized representatives the clay and year
first above-written.

TEAMSTERS LOCAL UNION
NO. 205

BOROUGH OF EDGEWOOD

~\}.&¾=

Carl A:i3§ey
Secretary-Treasurer
Date:

%\- l 7

· I

Patricia M. Schaefer
President of Council

«>
J. Edward
Mayor
Date:

(

19

i - 6 ' /6

