pennsylvania
OFFICE OF OPEN RECORDS

Standard Right-to-Know Law Request Form
Good communication is vital in the RTKL process. Complete this form thoroughly and retain a copy; it may be
required if an appeal is filed. You have 15 business days to appeal after a request is denied or deemed denied.

SUBMITTEDTO AGENCYNAME:_B_la_w_n_o_x_B_o_ro_u_g_h
_______________
4 16 2 2
Date ofRequest: _ _1__1__0_ _1_______

Submitted via: 0 Email

(Attn: AORO)

□ U.S. Mail □ Fax □ In Person

PERSONMAKINGREQUEST:
Name: Thomas Vielott
Mailing Address: 117

Company (ifapplicable):

w. 8th

City: Aspinwall

___________

_

Street
State: _P_A
__

Email: tvielott@gmail.com

Zip: 15125

Telephone: 412-295-9693

Fax: ________________

How do you prefer to be contacted if the agency has questions?

_

D Telephone 0 Email D U.S. Mail

RECORDSREQUESTED:Be clear and concise. Provide as much specific detail as possible, ideally including subject
matter, time frame, and type of record or party names. RTKL requests should seek records, not ask questions. Requesters
are not required to explain why the records are sought or the intended use of the records unless otherwise required by law.
Use additional pages if necessary.

Pursuant to Pennsylvania Right to Know Act, I hereby request the following records:
A copy of the most recent collective bargaining agreement/collective agreement between this police
department and the local police union/fraternal order/benevolent association, or other similar organization.
The requested documents will be made available to the general public, and this request is not being made for
commercial purposes,

DO YOUWANT COPIES? D Yes, printed copies (default if none are checked)
0 Yes, electronic copies preferred if available
□ No, in-person inspection of records preferred (may request copies later)
Do you want certified copies? □ Yes (may be subject to additional costs) 0 No

RTKLrequests may require payment or prepayment offees. See the O(ficialRTKLFeeSchedulefor more details.
Please notify me if fees associated with this request will be more than □ $100 ( or) 0 $_5
___
_
ITEMSBELOWTHIS LINEFORAGENCYUSE ONLY
Tracking: ______
30-Day

Ext.? □ Yes □

Date Received: ______
No (If Yes, Final Due Date: ______

Request was: D Granted

Response Due (5 bus. days): ______
) Actual Response Date: _____

D Partially Granted & Denied D Denied Cost to Requester:$ ______

_
_
_

D Appropriate third parties notified and given an opportunity to object to the release of requested records.
NOTE: In most cases, a completed RTKL request form is a public record.
More information about the RTKL is available at https:llwww.openrecords.pa.qov

FormupdatedFeb.3, 2020

COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT
AND NOW, this 6th day of January, 2020, it is hereby agreed between the Borough of

Blawnox, a Municipal C01poration in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, whose address is 376
Freeport Road, Blawnox, Pennsylvania, 15238, hereinafter refen-ed to as the "Borough"
A

N
D
The Blawnox Police Department, an incorporated association in the Borough of Blawnox,
and the members thereof, hereinafter refen-ed to as the "Police Department" that;
WHEREAS, the Borough and the Police Department have negotiated concerning the tenns

and conditions of this Agreement pursuant to the provisions of Act llI of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, enacted June 24, 1968; as amended; and
WHEREAS, the Borough desires to employ the Police Department to provide police

protection for the property, residents and visitors in the Borough of Blawnox; and
WHEREAS, the Police Department desires to be employed by the Borough and to provide

the aforesaid police protection.
NOW, THEREFORE, intending to be legally bound hereby, the paities hereto covenant and

agree as follows:
ARTICLE I- DURATION

Pursuant to the requirements of Act III of 1968, as amended, this Agreement shall be binding
upon the paities hereto, their successors and assigns, from Januaiy 1, 2020, to and including
December 31, 2022.
1

/JH

ARTICLE II - MANAGEMENT RIGHTS
Except as expressly limited by applicable law or provisions of this Agreement, the Borough
shall have and retain solely and exclusively all managerial responsibilities and rights to manage the
Borough business, including the right to dete1mine adequate employee staffing for all work duties.
Section 1.

The Borough reserves all 1ights and powers confeJTed upon it by the

Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and of the United States, except as
specifically limited by this Agreement.
Section 2.

The management of the Borough and direction of the work forces vested

exclusively with Council and the Mayor, except where expressly abridged by a specific provision of
this Agreement.
Section 3.

Nothing contained in this Agreement shall be in any way construed so as to

limit or diminish the authmity of Council and the Mayor to operate, manage and direct the Police
Depm1ment and its individual members, to increase or decrease the size of the Police Depm1ment, to
promote, demote, suspend, discipline or discharge any member thereof, or in any other way limit the
authority of the Borough except as to the provisions of this Agreement, as set forth herein.

ARTICLE III
Section 1.

DEFINITION

The term "Employee" when used in this Agreement refers to all full-time and

part-time employees who are sworn Police Officers and functioning as such, excluding employees
considered manage1ial.
Section 2.

Overtime. Overtime shall be defined as all hours worked in excess of forty

(40) hours per week and all hours worked in excess of eight (8) hours per twenty-four (24) hour
workday.
2

ARTICLE IV - SALARY
A.

The base salary of each officer shall increase in the amount of 2.5% in the contract
year 2020, to a base salary of$65,713.45;
The base salary of each officer shall increase in the amount of 2.5% in the contract
year 2021, to a base salaiy of$67,356.29;
The base salaty of each officer shall increase in the amount of 2.5% in the contract
yeai· 2022, to a base salary of$69,040.20.

B.

Effective Januaty 1, 2020, the hourly rate of the base pay will be based on 2080 hours
per year. For example, if an officer's base salaiy is $65,713.45 per yeai·, their hourly
rate would be $31.57 per hour;
Effective Januaiy 1, 2021, the hourly rate of the base pay will be based on 2080 hours
per year. For example, if an officer's base salary is $67,356.45 per year, their hourly
rate would be $32.38 per hour; and
Effective Januaiy 1, 2022, the hourly rate of the base pay will be based on 2080 hours
per year. For example, if an officer's base salary is $69,040.20 per year, their hom·ly
rate would be $33.19 per hour.

C.

The base salaty for a new a full-time Police Officer hired on or subsequent to Januai·y
1, 2020 shall be $65,713.45 per year, payable as follows:
1.

In the first year the rate shall be 80% of the base salary;

2.

In the second year the rate shall be 90% of the base salaty plus
yeai·ly percentage increases if applicable; and

3.

In the third year the rate shall be 100% of the base salary plus
yeai·ly percentage increases if applicable.
ARTICLE V - VACATIONS

A.

During the life of this Agreement, the following schedule of vacation benefits shall
apply:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

after one year of service - 1 week
after two years of service - 2 weeks
after seven yeai·s of service - 3 weeks
after fifteen years of service - 4 weeks
after twenty yeai·s of service - 5 weeks
3

All new officers hired after Januaiy I, 2016 should receive a maximum offow- (4) weeks
vacation as follows:
I.
2.
3.
4.
B.

after one year of service - I week
after two years of service - 2 weeks
after seven years of service - 3 weeks
after fifteen yeai·s of service - 4 weeks

A Police Officer shall be entitled to one-half of his vacation benefit as provided for in

Atticle V-A above, if he shall have worked a minimum of seven hundred (700) hours dming the
preceding calendar year. A Police Officer shall be entitled to receive the maximum benefit as
provided in Atticle V-A above, ifhe shall have worked one thousand fow-hundred (1400) or more
how-s dw-ing the preceding calendar yeai·. In the case of a Police Officer with less than one year of
service, the ainount of any vacation benefit shall be recommended by the Office of the Mayor with
approval being granted by Borough Council.
C.

Vacations will be selected in the order of the Police Officer's employment senimity.

D.

No vacations will be selected dming a week containing any of the paid holidays:

Clnistmas, New Year's Day, Thanksgiving, and the day after Thanksgiving.

Vacations may be

selected by any officer who has the following paid holidays off: Good Friday, Memorial Day, Fow-th
of July and Veterans Day.
E.

Tln·ee (3) weeks notice must be given to the Chief of Police when requesting

vacations, except as otherwise agreed upon by the Chief of Police and any Police Officer.
F.

It is mandatmy that a Police Officer take the vacation entitled to him and eained dw-ing

the preceding calendar year. Failure to do so by a Police Officer shall result in the Officer losing his
vacation time for that calendai· year in which he did not take his vacation.
4

If a Police Officer is requested to work by the Office of the Mayor dwing the period of time
he has scheduled for vacation, and if such Officer is not able to take a vacation dwing the calendar
year under these conditions, the Officer will be paid an amount equal to the swn paid on straight time
basis for the amount of vacation time forfeited dming the second pay pe1iod of the month of December
for that year.
No two (2) employees may schedule a vacation pe1iod at the same time, except in extreme
emergencies and upon approval by the Mayor.
G.

After five (5) years of service, all officers shall have the option of taking one (1) week

of vacation in daily increments with three (3) weeks written notice to the Chief of Police, pmsuant to
Sub-Paragraph (E) of this Article.

ARTICLE VI- SENIORITY
Section 1. Seniority shall be defined as the length of continuous service an employee has had
with the Borough from his last date of hire. Seniority shall accrne dming absence due to layoff,
disability due to accident or illness, or other authmized leaves of absence, provided it is not terminated
in accordance with Section 2 below.
Section 2.
A.

An employee's senioiity shall be broken for any of the following reasons:

Voluntary termination of employment, including retirement. A written resignation is

deemed accepted when delivered to the Mayor, Council or Borough Manager. However, any oral
resignation may be successfully withdrawn by the employee making it if he does so in writing and
within forty-eight (48) homs from the time the employee makes his oral resignation.
B.

Discharge for just cause.

C.

When recalled from layoff, upon his failure to return to work within a period offmty5

eight (48) hours after the employee has received notification to so return.
D.

Acceptance of other employment while on leave of absence, including sick leave,

unless approved by the Mayor.
E.

Layoff in excess of twelve (12) months.

F.

Immediately upon the issuance of a final detennination by a ce11ified physician,

chosen and paid for by the Borough, that an employee is pe1manently and totally disabled from
pe1f01mingthe work of a police officer, unless exempted by the Heru1 and Lung Act.
G.

Failure of the employee to return within fo1ty-eight (48) hours upon release of a

certified physician that the employee is deemed fit for duty to perfo1m the functions of a Police
Officer.
H.

When an employee is absent from scheduled work without calling off pursuant to the

Borough call-off procedures for three (3) consecutive work shifts, unless the employee can
demonsh·ate a reasonable basis for his failure to so call off.
Section 3.

When an employee whose senimity has been broken by any of the causes,

identified in Section 2 intmediately above, is hired again the employee's seniority shall begin to accme
as of the date of absence plus a maxinmm of twelve (12) months, or the actual time of seniority
broken, whichever is the lesser runount.
Section 4.

All new full-time employees, hired subsequent to this Agreement, shall be

considered probationa1y employees for a pe1iod of one (1) yeru· from their most recent date of
employment. During an employee's probationruy period, he shall have no seniority rights and he shall
have no tight to holiday pay, death leave or any other ancillruy benefit under this Agreement with the
exception of compensation of salruy, unless approved by the office of the Mayor, and except those
6

hospitalization benefits as set f01th in Alticle XII of this Agreement after the probationary employee
has completed ninety (90) days of employment. A probationary employee may be summarily
dismissed during his probation at the sole discretion of the Borough without being subject to the
grievance procedme defined herein. A probationary employee, upon completion of this probationar·y
period, shall be entitled to seniority credited retroactive to his most recent date of employment.
Section 5.

Seniority of employees who are hired on the same day shall be determined by

the lower of the last four (4) digits in the employee's social secmity number.

ARTICLE VII-LONGEVITY PAY

For Officers hired prior to January 1, 2016, the following schedule oflongevity shall prevail:
A.

$24.00 after five (5) years;

B.

$48.00 after eight (8) years;

C.

$72.00 after twelve (12) year·s;

D.

$106.00 after sixteen (16) year·s; and

E.

$130.00 after twenty (20) year·s.

All Police Officers hired after January 1, 2016 shall receive no longevity pay.

ARTICLE VIII - UNIFORM AND MAINTENANCE ALLOWANCE
Each Police Officer shall receive a uniform, equipment, and a uniform maintenance allowance
of up to a maximum of Four Hundred Fifty ($450.00) Dollars per year.

Responsibility for

administering such allowance shall be tlu·ough the Office of the Mayor. Any new full-time Police
Officer hired by the Borough shall be issued a complete set of uniforms and the following equipment
during the initial year· of employment as set forth on Exhibit "C".
Each Police Officer, Full or Part Time, shall be provided a bullet-proof vest on being hired,
7

unless the Officer already owns one meeting the Borough's specifications, and new bullet proof vests
when the Guaranty on the existing vest expires.
Upon separation of employment with the Borough, the subject Officer shall return all
equipment, including any bullet proof vest purchased by the Borough, and unif01m to the Borough
tln·ough the Office of the Mayor.

ARTICLE IX- LIFE INSURANCE
During employment with the Police Department, each Police Officer shall be covered by Fifty
Thousand ($50,000.00) Dollar te1m life insurance, or a term life insurance policy equal to two times
the officers base salaiy, whichever is less, as provided by the Borough. Such policy shall contain a
double indemnity clause with no cost to the Police Officer. At his option, additional coverage is
available with the additional premium to be paid by the Police Officer.

ARTICLE X - HOURS OF WORK AND WORK SCHEDULES
Section I.

The Borough reserves the exclusive right to dete1mine work schedules and

to dete1mine the number of employees, if any, to be used dming any work shift in accordance with
the te1ms of this Agreement.

The Borough will make eve1y effo11 to insure that there is a fair

distiibution of work shifts.
Section 2.

The workday shall be defined herein as twenty four (24) consecutive hours

commencing with the employee's shift staiting hour.
Section 3.

A regulai· workweek shall consist of five (5) consecutive eight (8) hour days,

whenever possible. Workweeks shall begin at 7:00 a.m. Sunday, and conclude at 6:59 a.m. the
following Sunday. A regular work day will consist of twenty-four (24) hour work shift which shall
begin at 7:00 a.m. and conclude at 6:59 a.m. on the following day.
8

Section 4.

Time and one-half (I 1/2) shall be paid for all hours worked in excess of fo11y

(40) hours dming any work week along with any holidays worked.
Time and one-half shall be paid for all hours worked in excess of eight (8) hours per each
twenty-four (24) hour shift.
Section 5.

For the purposes of this Agreement, there shall be two types of overtime,

scheduled and unscheduled overtime.
The Office of the Mayor and/or Chief of Police shall have full discretion to an·ange the
scheduling of all scheduled and unscheduled overtime.

The scheduling of all scheduled and

unscheduled overtime shall include the use of all full-time and part-time Police Officers at the
discretion of the Office of the Mayor and/or the Chief of Police.
Section 6.

It is understood that the Borough retains sole discretion to detennine the

number of employees, if any, to be used on overtime, in accordance with this Agreement.
Section 7.

When a situation occurs that imposes a threat to the public's health, safety or

welfare, it is agreed that any employee may be assigned to the abatement of that situation, regardless
of whether the work is overtime or not, without violating this Agreement, but shall receive all
compensations according to the te1ms of this Agreement.
Section 8.

AIi employees shall be required to work ove1time in event of an emergency

that necessitates the working of such overtime.
Section 9.

Except for emergencies, the Borough will notify employees in advance,

whenever possible, of any changes in their work schedule.
Section 10.

An employee called into work at a time when he is not regularly scheduled,

shall be guaranteed a minimum of two (2) hours pay.
9

Section I I.

Overtime pay shall be paid no later than the regular payday in the pay pe1iod

following the pe1iod in which the overtime is worked. It is the responsibility of the employee to
submit an ove11ime voucher to the Chief of Police for approval, which will not be umeasonably
denied, of ove11imepay p1ior to the end of that pay pe1iod.

ARTICLE XI-PAID HOLIDAYS
Each Police Officer shall receive eleven (11) paid holidays, paid at the rate of time and onehalf, annually during the life of this Agreement. Such holidays shall be as follows: New Year's Day,
Mrutin Luther King Day, Good F1iday, Memmial Day, Fom1h of July, Labor Day, Columbus Day,
Veteran's Day, Thanksgiving, the day after Thanksgiving, and Clu·istmas Day.

ARTICLE XII-HOSPITALIZATION
Dming the life of this Agreement, the following hospitalization provisions shall prevail:
A.

Each full-time Officer shall pay the sum oftlu·ee and one-half(3.5%) percent of the

employee's base pay (also referred to as the "employee contribution") in addition to any office copays, prescription drng co-pays or costs required in the Schedule of Benefits for the UPMC Gold
HSA $2,000.00 Plan.

A Schedule of Benefits shall be supplied to each full-time Officer. The

Borough shall ru·range for each Officer to have the option to pru1icipate in a pre-tax deduction plan
for the employee contiibution obligation.
B.

The Borough shall have the option to change the health insurance plan identified in

Subparagraph A above as long as the health benefits, and not the cost for the benefit, are equal to or
greater than the cmTent plan. The pru1ies agree to follow the process outlined below if the Borough
intends to change health care providers. The Borough will issue a Request for Proposals at least six
(6) months before the end of the health care plan year. Plan providers will have a period ofthii1y (30)
10

calendar days to submit proposals. The Borough will have fifteen (I 5) calendar days from the date
provider proposals are due to summarize, compare and evaluate the proposals. If the Borough elects
to change health care providers, it will have five (5) calendar days from the end of the evaluation
pe1iod to notify the Police Depru.iment of its intention to change providers. The Police Department
will have fifteen (I 5) calendru.·days from the receipt of the w1itten notice above to evaluate the
Borough's proposed health care plan. Subsequently, the Borough and Police Department will have
an additional fifteen (15) days to negotiate changes to the proposed plan. If the pru.ties cannot agree
that the proposed plan is equal to or better than the current plan or to requested changes by the end of
the fifteen (15) day negotiating period, the matter will be refen-ed to ru.-bitrationimmediately. The
Arbitt·ator will be chosen by mutual agreement of the pru.ties from a panel of three (3) Arbitt·ators.
The Arbitrator will have sixty (60) days from the date of the Arbitt·ation to detennine if the new health
care plan provides equal or better coverage. If the Arbitrator detennines that the proposed plan does
not provide equal or better coverage, the Borough may not change health care providers.

If the

Borough exercises the option to change the existing health insurance plan and if an increase in the
deductibles are a result of said change, the Borough shall pay the difference between the deductibles
inc1med by the Officers in the existing plan and the new plan.
C.

Each police Officer shall have the option to opt-out of the Health Insurance Plan of

the Borough and if the Officer elects the option, the Borough shall pay to each Officer the sum of
Three Hundred ($300.00) Dollars per month. If an Officer is required to opt back into the Borough's
Health Insurance Plan because of the loss of alternative insurance coverage, the Borough shall pe1mit
the Officer to opt back into the health insurance plan, subject to the mies and regulations of the cun-ent
health insurance provider and the proration of any monies paid to the Officer while the Officer
11

participated in the alternative health insurance plan.
D.

Police Officers who are disabled in the line of duty will continue to receive

hospitalization in accordance with the provisions of the Enforcement Officer Disability Benefits Law
(Heart & Lung Act), Act of 1935, P.L. 47, No. 193.

ARTICLE XIII - PAY FOR SCHOOL
A.

Each Police Officer shall be paid for anymandato1ytraining stipulated by the Borough

or State Law.
B.

Each Police Officer shall receive compensation at the rate of time and one-half for

mandato1y training while also being requested to work a regular eight (8) hour shift or on days off.

ARTICLE XIV - BEREAVEMENT PAY
A.

Four (4) days off for death of spouse or children. Tlu-ee (3) days off for death of father,

mother, brother and sister.
B.

Two (2) days off for death of father-in-law, or mother-in-law.

C.

One (I) day off for death of grandparents, brother-in-law or sister-in-law.

ARTICLE XV - PAY FOR JUVENILE OFFICER'S MEETING AND OTHER RELATED
POLICE MEETINGS
The Police Officer so designated to be the Blawnox Police Department's Juvenile Officer shall
be paid Twenty ($20.00) Dollars per meeting for attending the Fox Chapel Area School District
Juvenile Officer's meeting.

Such attendance shall be subject to the approval of the Office of the

Mayor.

ARTICLE XVI - PERSONAL DAYS
Dwing the life of this Agreement, the following procedure on personal days will be adhered
to:
12

A.

Each officer shall receive one (1) personal day per year. Personal days may be

accumulated up to two (2) days, however, if not used, shall be paid the prevalent daily wage for the
accumulated personal days over two (2) personal days.
B.

Any officer with over twenty (20) years of service shall receive two (2) personal days

per year.

ARTICLE XVII - CRIMINAL AND CIVIL SUITS
The Borough shall pay the legal expenses for each Police Officer in the event of any criminal
or civil suit filed against the Officer for the perfonnance or nonpetformance of their duties. Counsel
for the Police Officer shall be chosen by mutual consent of the Borough and the Officer, if there is no
applicable insurance coverage.

ARTICLE XVIII - GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
Dming the life of the Agreement, the following grievance procedure shall be adhered to:
A.

No Police Officer shall be disciplined, tenninated, suspended, reprimanded, reduced

in salary or compensation, or denied any personal advantage without just cause.

B.

Any regular Police Officer having a giievance shall first discuss it orally within ten

(10) days from the occmTence with his superiors, the Chief of Police and/or the Mayor.

The

Chairperson of the Wage and Policy Committee shall be the sole representative of the aggiieved
police officer at this step of the grievance procedure, however, the aggrieved Police Officer may be
jointly represented by legal counsel at the aggrieved officer's request.
C.

The aggiieved Police Officer shall have the Chairperson of the Wage and Policy

Committee available at this discussion. If, in the case the Chaiiperson is the agg1ieved Officer, he
then shall have a 1ight to have any other Officer of the Blawnox Police Depru1ment available at the
13

discussion. The aggrieved Officer may request a written reply to his grievance. Such reply shall be
submitted from the Chief of Police and/or Mayor in writing and shall be returned to the aggrieved
Officer within ten (10) days of the final meeting.
D.

If the giievance has not been settled to the satisfaction of the aggiieved Police Officer

in the first step, it shall be reduced to w1iting, and the aggi-ieved Officer and the Chairperson of the
Wage and Policy Committee shall request, in writing, an executive session with the Borough Council,
by submitting such request in writing to the President of the Borough Council within ten (IO) days
after the written reply from the Chief of Police and/or the Mayor to the aggiieved Officer. If the
request for an executive meeting is gi·anted, the Borough Council must reply in writing to the
aggrieved Officer within ten (I 0) days from the executive session. However, if the Borough Council
fails to set a date for an executive session or the grievance within ten (10) days of the receipt of such
a request, and if the Officer is not satisfied with the reply of the Borough Council, the aggrieved
Officer may then request in writing to the President of Council that the giievance be submitted to
arbitration. Such notice must be given ten (I 0) days after the Borough Council's failure to set an
executive session date or ten (I 0) days after the written reply of the Borough Council is received. The
hearing before the Borough Council shall not be waived by either party.
E.

Within ten (! 0) days of the receipt of the request for arbitration, the Wage and Policy

Committee and the aggrieved Officer shall request the American Arbitration Association to provide
a panel of not less than seven (7) arbitrators from which the Borough and the aggi·ieved Officer will
select the arbitrator by each one alternatively checking off a name of an arbitt·ator and the arbitrator
left shall be designated as the arbitrator. Such arbitrator shall not have the power to add to, disregard,
or modify any of the terms and conditions of this Agreement. The scope of the arbitration shall not

14

exceed the meeting and application of the provisions of this Agreement and shall, in any event, be
limited to the specific subject matter submitted to the arbitrator. The decision of the arbitt·ator shall
be final and binding upon the aggrieved officer and the Borough. Such decision shall be rendered
within thirty (30) calendar days. The expense and salaty incident to the services of the arbitt·ator shall
be paid by the losing party and shall be detennined by the arbitt·ator.
F.

When a grievance has been settled or sustained in whole or in prut, the arbitt·ator's

awru·d shall be paid or executed by the loser within ten (10) days after the receipt of the decision of
the arbitrator.
G.

The Borough Council, the aggrieved Police Officer, the Wage and Policy Committee

and/or their counsel may, after an arbitration hearing that has been set in before such hearing day,
have more meetings in an attempt to settle the grievance. This Alticle shall not in any way stop the
due process of the degree of the grievance procedure unless the grievance is settled to the satisfaction
of the aggrieved Officer.
H.

The provisions of this Alticle may be waived by written consent of the pruties, except

the heruing before Council.

ARTICLE XIX - RESIDENCY REQUIREMENT
Each Police Officer is required to reside within a seven (7) mile radius of the Borough's
boundru·ies.

ARTICLE XX - LEA VE FOR DISABILITY
A.

Job Related
1.

The Borough agrees to cooperate towru·d the prompt
settlement of employee on-the-job injmy claims, when such
claims are due and owing as required by law. The Borough
15

N\-\
Pr1,

shall provide Worker's Compensation protection for all
Officers or the equivalent thereof if the injmy arose out of or
in the comse of employment.

B.

2.

The Borough shall also institute a Worker Compensation
Policy as outlined in Exhibit "A" (attached).

3.

The Borough reserves the right to call back a Police Officer to
pe1f01m light duty with the pennission of the attending
physician.

4.

Any provision of the Heait & Lung Act takes precedence over
any of the above points.

5.

It shall be the responsibility of the Police Officer to maintain
his/her qualification and certification as a Police Officer while
the Officer is off on a work-related or non-work related
injmy. The responsibility to maintain their qualification and
certification is required as long as the Officer is physically able
to do so. Each Officer shall bear the responsibility to notify
the Borough, within a reasonable period of time, of the
Officer's return to work so that the Borough can arrange for
any qualification or ce1tification procedmes. The failure of
any Officer to maintain their qualification and/or certification
as set fmth above shall subject the Officer to possible
disciplinaiy action pmsuant to this Agreement.

Non-Job Related Sickness or Injmy
1.

Each Officer shall be entitled to the following:
(a)

Each Officer will be entitled to seven (7) paid sick
days per year. Officers will be able to accumulate
two (2) unused sick days per year up to a maximum
offomteen (14) sick days. Any unused sick days, not
available for accumulation, shall be lost. The
accumulation of sick days up to a maximum of
fomteen (14) may only be used for actual sick days
and there will be no buy-out of the accumulated sick
days at the time ofretirement. If two (2) consecutive
sick days are used by an officer, a doctor's excuse is
mandatmy.

(b)

All Officers will be required to use their sick days
16

before they will be entitled to compensation under the
Borough's Sick and Accident Policy. For example, if
an officer has used none of his seven (7) sick days and
incurs a non-job related illness, the Officer must use
his seven (7) sick days before he is entitled to the
appropriate sick and accident benefit ( 60% of base
pay). If an Officer has used three (3) sick days and
incurs a non-job related illness or injury, the Officer
will be required to use the remaining four sick days and
three other paid or unpaid leave days before the Officer
will be entitled to the appropriate benefit under the
Borough's Sick and Accident Policy. Once applicable,
the employee shall receive the Borough's sick and
accident benefits for the first ninety (90) days of the
sickness or injury.
2.

After the 90th day of sick and accident benefits, the Officer shall be entitled to
the Long-Term Disability benefits provided by the Borough's insurance
carrier as outlined in Exhibit "B" attached.

3.

The Borough reserves the right to require independent medical reviews for
any and all sickness and injuries.

Any provision of the Heaii & Lung Act takes precedence over any of the above points.

ARTICLE XXI- RESPONSIBILITY OF THE POLICE
OFFICERS OF THE BOROUGH

The Police Officers of the Borough will be responsible to perfmm any just and lawful order
by the Mayor of the Borough.

ARTICLE XXII - COURT TIME
During the te1m of this Agreement, the following procedure will be followed in regard to
court time:
A.

Each Police Officer subpoenaed to District Court, Coroner's Inquest, Juvenile
Court, Pre-Trial Heaiings, Criminal Comi or Civil Comi, shall receive the
following rates of pay:
17

1.

District Court - for any time spent for the first two (2) hours, two (2)
hours at the regular rate of pay, time and one-half, if applicable. After
the first two (2) hours, the Police Officer will receive a regular hourly
wage, and time and one-half if applicable.

2.

All other comt time - for any time spent between one (I) and four (4)
hours, the officer will receive 4-hours regular wage, time and one-half
if applicable. For any time spent in excess of four (4) hours, the officer
shall receive his regular hourly wage for the exact hours worked, and
time and one-half if applicable.

3.

The Police Officer shall retain all witness fees paid to the Police
Officer.

ARTICLE XXIII- MISCELLANEOUS

A.

In the event of merger with another police depaitment, the Wage and Policy

Committee shall be contacted regarding all aspects of the police merger. In no way does this imply
that the Wage and Policy Committee has the ability to paiticipate in or inhibit negotiations with
another municipality.
B.

C.

The following items are also provided under this Agreement:

I.

Accident and Health Insurance; (shmt term - first ninety (90) days);
(Reference Page 18, Alticle XX, B-2)

2.

False An·est Insurance.

Service Increment - The Borough agrees, as per SBO 394, Section 5 to change the

maximum length of service increments to One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars per month for each
completed year of service in excess of twenty-five (25) years with a maximum of Five Hundred
($500.00) Dollai·s per month after five (5) completed years in excess of twenty-five (25) yeai·s, i.e.
year twenty-six (26) through year thirty (30). Such length of service shall be paid in addition to the
monthly pension or retirement allowance. This section only applies to full-time years of service. The
18

Police Department agrees that all full-time officers are obligated to increase the officers pension
contribution if required by an actuary study resulting from the increase of the service increment from
Twenty-Five ($25.00) Dollars per year to a maximum of One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars per year
and a total of Five Hundred ($500.00) Dollars.
ARTICLE XXIV - LEGALITY
Both paities hereto specifically agree that it is their intent that this Agreement, under all
circumstances and in every respect, shall comply with all applicable statutes, governmental
regulations and judicial decisions. In the event that some aspect of this Agreement shall be found not
to comply with applicable statutes, governmental regulations and judicial decisions, the paities
shall inunediately bai·gain concerning adjus11nentsin the Agreement designed to make the Agreement
comply with the applicable statute, governmental regulation or judicial decision with which it is at
odds.
ARTICLE XXV - SEPARABILITY

In the event any of the te1ms or provisions of this Agreement shall be found invalid or declared
unenforceable by reason of any Federal or State statute, or Federal or State directive, rule or
regulation, now in effect or hereinafter to become effective, or by reason of the decision of any Federal
or State Court, such invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect or impair any other te1ms or
provisions hereof, unless the other te1ms or provisions are directly affected by the section declared
invalid or unenforceable. The parties thereupon may, within thitty (30) days, meet to discuss said
invalidity or unenforceability.
ARTICLE XXVI - PART-TIME POLICE OFFICERS
An hourly rate for all pait-time officers shall be as follows:

19

a.

Beginning January 1, 2020, shall be Eighteen ($18.00) Dollars per hour;

b. Beginning January 1, 2021, shall be Nineteen ($19.00) Dollars per hour; and
c. Beginning January 1, 2022, shall be Twenty ($20.00) Dollars per hour.
Pait-time police will not receive any benefits, other than wages, as identified herein.
The initial clothing allowance for all pait-time Police Officers shall be administered by the
Office of the Mayor and the equipment for each new pa1t-time officer shall be dete1mined from the
list of equipment identified in Exhibit "C". Each part-time officer shall be granted an annual uniform
allowance, the responsibility of which shall be determined by the Office of the Mayor. If a vest is
purchased for a part time police officer and the pait-time police officer leaves the employment with
the Borough and takes the vest with them they must pay back to the Borough, on a pro-rata basis, a
reasonable amount that will be established by the Mayor. Said pro-rata basis is attached hereto as
Exhibit "D".

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto, through their duly authorized officers and
representatives and intending to be legally bound hereby, have hereinafter affixed their hands and
seals this 61hday of January, 2020.

BLAWNOX POLICE DEPARTMENT

BOROUGH OF BLAWNOX

x:\2018 clients\municipal clients\borough ofblawnox\police • contracts\collective bargaining agreement· 2020 · 2022 · january 13, 2020.docx

20

