AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE
TOWNSHIP OF UPPER ST. CLAIR
AND
ASSOCTATION OF POLICE OFFICERS
OF THE
TOWNSHIP OF UPPER ST. CLAIR

JANUARY 1, 2020
THROUGH

DECEMBER 31, 2022
10.

11.

12.

13.

14,

15,

16.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE
SCOPE AND DURATION
DEFINITIONS
TOWNSHIP RIGHTS
EMPLOYEE RIGHTS
COMPENSATION
CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE
RETIREMENT
DEFERRED COMPENSATION CONTRIBUTION
VACATION, HOLIDAYS AND LEAVE
INSURANCE
RETIREMENT LIFE INSURANCE
GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
MISCELLANEOUS
SUPREMACY OF LAWS AND REGULATIONS
NOTICE

SIGNATURE PAGE

PAGE

2-3

3-5

5-9

9-11
11
11-16
16-19
20
20-21
21-22
22
22-23

24
AGREEMENT

THIS AGREEMENT made this Ist day of January, 2020 by and betwecn the TOWNSHIP OF
UPPER ST. CLAIR, a municipal subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (hereinafter
referred to as the "Township"), and the ASSOCIATION OF POLICE OFFICERS OF THE
TOWNSHIP OF UPPER ST. CLAIR (hereinafter referred to as the "Members" or the

"Association").

The parties have engaged in collective bargaining in compliance with the Act of 1968, June 24,
Public Law No. 111, Section 1, 43, P.S. 217.1 et seq. and set forth herein are the terms and
conditions of cmployment, including compensation, hours, working conditions, grievances and
other benefits for the duration of this Agreement in accordance with the Award of the Act 111

Arbitration Board.

The purpose of this instrument is to set forth the Agreement of the contracting parties as to rates of
pay and other conditions of employment, so as to promote orderly and peaceful relations with the
members to achicve uninterrupted operations in the Police Department and to achieve the highest
level of employee performance consistent with safety, good health and sustained effort.

1. SCOPE AND DURATION

1.1. This Agreement shall be applicable to members of the Township's Police
Department in the present positions of Police Officer Levels 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6,
Sergeant and Lieutenant. This Agreement shall be effective January 1, 2020, and
terminate December 31, 2022.

2. DEFINITIONS

2.1. MEMBER: For the purpose of this Agreement, member shall mean a sworn police
officer holding rank of Police Officer, Sergeant, or Lieutenant of the Township of
Upper St. Clair who is actively carried on the Township payroll regardless of
assignment. Lieutenants are covered under the terms of this contract, although they
serve in a managerial capacity.

The word "employee" is reserved for civilian personnel who are not sworn to
perform police duties and who may or may not be included on other Agreements or
contracts but who are actively carried on the Township payroll.

2.2. The provisions of this Agreement shall not apply to any member who is on active
duty in the Armed Services of the United States for a period in excess of two (2)

calendar weeks per calendar year.

2.3. ROTATING DUTY ROSTER: For the purpose of this Agreement, the rotating
duty roster shall mean the list of members in order of seniority. There shall be two
(2) such rosters maintained: one for the rank of police officcr, and the other for the
rank of sergeant and lieutenant. Such rosters shall be activated in the event that

2
2.4,

2.5,

2.6,

overtime must be used to maintain patrol strength for the safety of the residents of
the Township of Upper St. Clair and to assist other Township Government Agencies
with security requirements. Should the rotating duty roster be exhausted without
filling the aforementioned requirements, the Chief of Police may require member or
members to report for duty.

For details requested in writing by private agencies, the rosters shall be activated but
no mandatory callout will be ordered.

In the event that circumstance should arise that require the member, by training or
assignment, to perform a special duty, the Chief of the Department of Police shall
make the determination of what member or members shall be so assigned.

TIME: For this purpose of this Agreement, time shall be deemed to mean any and
all time periods, measured in hours and minutes, which shall be served by any
on-duty full-time member serving the Township in or out of uniform, the said
service being payable at the rate of pay applicable to the position the member is
serving in at the given time, i.e., either straight time, overtime, or holiday pay time.

TOWNSHIP RIGHTS

3.1.

It is understood and agreed that the Township has all the customary and usual rights,
powers, functions and authority of management including but not limited to the right
to formulate reasonable rules and regulations governing working conditions.

EMPLOYEE RIGHTS

4.1.

Members shall have rights in accordance with previously negotiated Agreements as
outlined below:

4.1.1. The parties agree that all vacancies in the positions outlined in Article 5
herein shall be filled by full-time members;

4.1.2. Equitable distribution of educational opportunities will be made to all
full-time members.

4.1.3. The Township agrees that all bargaining unit vacancies shall be posted for
a period of two (2) weeks prior to the filling of said vacancies and that any
police officer may submit his name for consideration for said vacancy.
Selection of applicants to fill said vacancies shall be within the sole
prerogative of management.

4.1.4. A committee composed of one (1) senior officer and two (2) shift
personnel shall serve on an equipment committee to advise the Township
concerning the procurement of police equipment. The Township, however,
shall retain the right to make final decisions concerning the purchase of any
and all equipment. The Township will meet with the equipment committee
4.2.

4.1.5.

4.1.6.

in September or October prior to the formulation of the Township Budget
for the following fiscal year.

Members shall be assured that the following conditions concerning
equipment maintenance will be followed:

4.1.5.1. Safe and adequate maintenance of police vehicles and
equipment shall be provided;

4.1.5.2. Police vehicles will be equipped with proper safety equipment
as recommended by police personnel and determined by the
Township;

4.1.5.3. Individual lockers in a designated locker room will be provided
for all members;

4.1.5.4. All police patrol vehicles shall be equipped with air
conditioning.

Three (3) days notice will be given in advance of any change of weckly
scheduled shifts. Assignment to layover hour is not a change of scheduled
shift.

BILL OF RIGHTS

4.2.1.

4.2.2,

4.2.3.

4.2.4.

4.2.5,

4.2.6,

When an anonymous complaint is made against a police officer and no
corroborative evidence is obtained, the complaint shall be classified as
unfounded.

When any citizen complaint is filed greater than ninety (90) calendar days
after the date of the alleged event complained of, which if true, could not
lead to a criminal charge, such complaint shall be classified as unfounded
and the accused employee shall not be required to submit a written report,
but he shall be notified orally or in writing of such claim.

A police officer, whether a subject or witness, must be informed of the
nature of the interrogation at the outset of the interrogation.

If the interrogated police officer writes a written statement, a transcript is
taken, or mechanical record made, a copy of same must be given to the
interrogated police officer, without cost, upon request.

If any police officer under interrogation is under arrest, or is likely to be
placed under arrest as a result of the intcrragation, he shall be completely

informed of all his rights prior to the commencement of the interrogation.

At the request of any police officer under interrogation, he shall have the
right to be represented by counsel of his choice and/or an F,OP.

4
4.2.7,

representative who shail be present at all times during the interrogation.
The interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonable time until
representation can be obtained.

Unless agreed to by the officer, the municipality shall not make any public
comment on the reason for any disciplinary action brought against the

officer.

5. COMPENSATION

5.1. SALARY SCHEDULES

 

There shall be across the board increases in Police Officers’ salaries as follows:

91/01 2017 225%
01/012018 225%
B41/012019 295%

01/01/2020

01/01/2021

01/01/2022

Effective January 1, 204420

POSITION/GRADE MONTHS

Police Officer 1
Police Officer 2
Police Officer 3
Police Officer 4
Police Officer 5
Police Officer 6

Sergeant

Lieutenant

(0-12)
(13-24)
(25-36)
(37-48)
(49-60)

(61 +)

2020
January
$28.00-+perheur
$30.15 / per hour
$29.22 perheour
$31.47 / per hour
$31.93-+ per hour
$34.38 / per hour
$37.42 + per hour
$40.29 / per hour
SO Lise: boys
$43.22 / per hour
$42.83 / per hour
$46.12 / per hour
$4712 perheur
$50.73 / per hour
2020
January

$5484 perhour
$55.80 / per hour

3.0%
2.5%
2.5%

2021
January
$30.90 / per hour
$32.26 / per hour

$38.97 / per hour
$41.30 / per hour

$41.05 / per hour
$44,30 / per hour

$43.80-/ per hour
$47.27 / per hour

Seeker
$52.00 / per hour

2021
January
$53.01 per hour
$57.20 / per hour

2022
January
$29.27/ per hour
$31.67 / per hour

$30.55 / perhour
$33.07 / per hour

$33.38-+perheur
$36.12 / per hour

$39:12/ per hour
$42.33 / per hour

$41.96-+per hour
$45.41 / per hour

$44,78- per hour
$48.45 / per hour

$49.26 perhour
$53.30 / per hour
2022
January

$5419per hour
$58.63 / per hour

A Sergeant shall receive ten (10%) percent more than a Police Officer 6 and a

Lieutenant shall receive ten (10%) percent more than a Sergeant.
5.2.

5.3,

5.4.

A shift differential of two (2%) percent of the hourly rate shall be paid for all hours
worked between 3:00 p.m. and 7:00 am. The existing two (2%) percent shift
differential shall be expanded to cover all hours worked between 7:00 a.m. and
3:00 p.m. on Saturdays and Sundays only,

Maximum pay grades will be reached after completion of sixty (60) months for
police officers and immediately for sergeants and lieutenants. ‘here will be a six-
(6) month probationary period for sergeants and lieutenants. For police officers, the
probationary period for movement into pay Grade 2 will be after completion of
twelve (12) months, but the probationary period for appointment as a regular police
officer will be after completion of eighteen (18) months.

IN-GRADE PAY

Any police officer that performs in a position of rank higher than his appointed rank
shall receive in-grade pay.

OVERTIME

5.3.1. | Overtime work shall be assigned on an equitable revolving seniority basis
through a posted rotating duty roster provided that the officer is qualified to
perform the work required. Overtime rates shall be paid for all hours
worked in excess of eight (8) hours per day, forty hours per week, at time
and one-half rate. Vacation, personal days, time-owed days, and sick days
shall be considered a day worked for overtime purposes. Bereavement
leave shall be considered time worked only for the forty (40) hour work
week with respect to overtime. There shall be no pyramiding of overtime.
Overtime, when applicable, shall be computed on the basis of onc and
one-half times the hourly rates for each grade (and not one and one-half
plus the hourly rates) as sct forth above.

§.3.2.. Whenever an officer is called out for overtime purposes, other than the
early start or the continuation of a shift, he shall be guaranteed a minimum
four (4) hours at overtime pay rates. Police Officers may work two (2)
consecutive shifts (total of sixteen hours) on a seniority basis.

5.3.3. When the rotating duty roster is being utilized and it is exhausted, the
member with the least seniority shall be considered first for being ordered
out to work. On a shift change-over, the member must have eight (8) hours
off between shifts (with respect to being ordered out).

5.3.4. Separate seniority lists for overtime work shall be kept for patrol officers
and supervisors. When the most senior officer has completed an overtime
assignment, he shall go to the bottom of said rotating duty roster.

LONGEVITY PROGRAM

§.4.1. | Members shall receive additional compensation which is to be computed
for each individual as follows: Longevity shall be paid in the fifth year of

6
5.5.

5.6.

service and thereafter at the rate of one-half percent (1/2%) of the annual
wage rate in effect at the time, multiplied by the years of service with the
following cap:

 

Effective January 1, 2019, the Longevity Cap shall be:
Four Thousand Seven Hundred Fifty ($4,750.00) Dollars

TRAVEL PAY

5.5.1.

Travel pay in the amount of $300 will be paid to members on or about the
24th pay period of each fiscal year. No member may receive a bonus for
more than $300 in any single fiscal year.

EDUCATION REIMBURSEMENT

5.6.1.

5.6.2.

5.6.3.

Police Officers hired on or before December 31, 2016 shall receive an
annual education reimbursement payment. Payment will be made during
the month of June. The education reimbursement will be payable only to
members who have completed one (1) year of service as of the payment
date each year.

Associate’s Degree $1,000.00
Bachelor's Degree $1,400.00
Masters or Doctorate Degree $1,600.00

Police training will be directed to members covered by this Agreement.
Travel pay in the amount of twenty cents ($.20) per mile for mileage
incurred driving to and from schools or training functions initiated and
assigned by the Township will be paid to members when actual travel costs
are incurred. Members attending Township assigned training functions
shall be reimbursed for actual and reasonable expenses actually incurred
and travel pay for travel to and from the school as determined necessary.

Any member with three (3) years service may accept at the member's
option, and in lieu of education reimbursement, a tuition reimbursement
not to exceed the amount of benefit for earned credit.

An eligible member shall notify the Township in writing if they desire the
tuition reimbursement option and shall supply a copy of their college
tuition.
5.7.

5.6.4. Police Officers hired on or after January 1, 2017 shall not receive an
education reimbursement payment until completion of the filth (5") year
of service.

COURT ATTENDANCE

5.7.1. Attendance at Criminal Court, pre-trial, subpoenaed deposition or Federal
Court proceedings will entitle members to normal compensation plus
retention of court witness fees while in court, if attendance is during
member's regularly scheduled shift.

5.7.2. Ifamember on the second shift (i.e., 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. or 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.) attends Criminal Court, subpoenaed deposition or Federal Court
proceedings, during his regularly scheduled shift, his regularly scheduled
shift shall be considered completed when court proceeding terminates.

5.7.3. Local hearings attended while off duty will be compensated for at the rate
of time and onc-half per hour with a two-hour minimum.

5.7.4. Anemployee required to attend State or Federal Criminal Court or Juvenile
Court during off duty hours will given the option of a time owed day or a
minimum of four (4) hours overtime plus actual time in excess of overtime

only.

NOTE: All hours worked in excess of five (5) hours in Court must be
taken at the money option. Only Court attendance of five (5) hours or less
can be taken at time owed option.

For attendance at all other hearings including but not limited to summary
appeals and statutory appeals, during off-duty hours, the officer will
receive a minimum of four (4) hours overtime plus actual time in excess of
overtime earned.

wa
ml
a

5.8. OUTSIDE SERVICE (SPECIAL DETAIL)

5.8.1. Functions other than official departmental assignments will be covered by
uniformed officers when so assigned by the Township. Payment will be
based on a minimum of four (4) hours at a time and one-half overtime rate
with the outside service user reimbursing the Township directly.

6. CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT ALLOWANCE

6.1.

Members shall be entitled to an annual clothing, equipment and maintenance
allowance in the amount of $725.

An additional annual payment of $50.00 will be paid to motorcycle patrol officers.

Annual portions of the annual allowance may not be accumulated without specific

approval of the Township. All clothing and equipment purchased with clothing and

equipment allowance that is not expendable will be returned for the Township upon
8
*
3K

retirement or termination of any nature. Replacement or repair cost of personal
items of dress or equipment, which are damaged while an officer is performing
police duties, will be provided by the Township within reasonable limits.
Extraordinary costs of items which an officer should not wear on duty (such as
expensive watches or jewelry) may not be covered. Each replacement or repair cost
request will be considered separately by the Township.

6.2. _In the event the Township changes the uniform or firearm during the term of this
agreement, the Township agrees that it will absorb the cost of necessary new items
for each member, including the cost of uniforms and necessary incidental items.

6.3. It is understood that members employed in the investigative and juvenile division
may purchase civilian clothing with said clothing allowance.

6.4. All officers hired after the effective date of this Agreement shall not be entitled to
any uniform allowance during their first year of employment. After completion of
one year, all newly hired officers shall be entitled to a full uniform allowance on a
pro rata basis for the balance of the year.

RETIREMENT

7.1. There shall be no Social Security offset.

7.2. Pension eligibility is at age 54 with 25 years service.”

7.3. Subject to the provisions of Section 7.3.1., there shall be no contributions to the

pension fund by police officers.**

7.3.1. All funds received by the Township for or on behalf of the retirement plan
for police employees from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be
credited to the police pension fund for purposes of this section. In the
event that the pension plans actuary determines that contributions to the
fund beyond those received from the Commonwealth as described above
are necessary in that the value of funds received from the Commonwealth
is less than the minimum contribution required as determined in
accordance with Act 205 or other applicable statute, then police employees
shall contribute to the fund to the extent necessary to meet the minimum
municipal obligation necessary to maintain the plan as actuarially sound.
The purpose of this provision is to credit the sums received by the
Commonwealth on behalf of the police to be utilized to provide police
pension benefits and to cause police employee contributions only in the
event that such contributions are required and only to the extent in excess
of the Commonwealth contribution on behalf of police employees.

In the event the parties disagree concerning the amount to be contributed
by police employees into the police pension fund; the employees may

See also Section 7.6.

See Section 7.10 for current contribution status.

9
74,

7.5.

7.6.

7.7.

7.8.

7.9,

7.10.

7A1.

7.12.

grieve this issue under the collective bargaining Agreement. This right to
grieve this matter includes the right to take the matter to binding grievance
arbitration. In the event that the issue is grieved, no contribution shall be
taken from the police officers until the grievance is resolved.

Effective January 1, 1995 a $100 service increment after only one (1) additional year
of service beyond the twenty-fifth year. Service Increment: Effective, January 1,
2017 the Police Pension Plan shall be amended by increasing the service increment
for years of completed service in excess of 25 years via one (1) additional step after
the 27" year. Officer shall thus be entitled to an increment of:

26 years of service $100 per month
27 years of service $200 per month

Effective January 1, 1995 - C.O.L.A. up to 10% of established pension benefit.

Effective January 1, 1999 the previsions of Act 24 of 1998 shall be implcmented
providing for early retirement after the completion of twenty (20) years of service.

Effective January 1, 1999, Police contributions to pension fund eliminated for the
life of the Award, subject to plan actuary determination of need and Agreement by
the Association. If no Agreement as to need, the matter to be resolved through
arbitration.

Effective January 1, 2001, the existing ten (10%) percent cost of living provision
shall be amended pursuant to Act 600 to provide that in addition to other monthly
pension or retirement allowances or increments, each person receiving retirement
benefits shall receive annual cost-of-living increases equal to the percentage
increases in the Consumer Price Index from the year in which the member last
worked, provided, that in no case shall the total pension benefits exceed 75% of
the compensation for computing retirement benefits or 20% of such
compensation in total cost-of-living increases, whichever is lesser.

Effective January 1, 2001, Police contributions to pension fund eliminated for the
life of the Award, subject to plan actuary determination of need and agreement by
the Association. If no agreement as to need, the matter to be resolved through

arbitration.

Effective with May 8, 2003, arbitration award, police pension contributions resume
at the rate of 5% of gross earnings.

Effective January 1, 2006, this Agreement may be reopened pursuant to Act 111 of
1968 to allow the parties to bargain over pension changes, specifically involving the
amount and/or necessity of Police contributions to the pension plan.

Effective as soon as practicable after the issuance of this Award, the Township shall
file the appropriate documentation with the Internal Revenue Service to make any

contributions necessary by police officers tax deferred.

10
7.13.

DROP: Effective January 1, 2014, a 30-month DROP shall be added to the police
pension plan pursuant to the following limited caveats:

Caveats:

The officer must declare their participation into the DROP
Between July 15 and December 31 each year.
Minimum age to enter DROP is fifty-five (55).
No more than four (4) officers may declare/enroll in the DROP per
calendar year.
© The four (4) officers shall pick based on seniority — just
because an officer declines one (1) year does not mean that
he is not eligible the next year.
COLA increases to monthly pension shall be waived during the
DROP participation, but “the clock” will begin the first day of the
plan year following the conclusion of the officer’s DROP
participation.
Officers shall not earn and/or accumulate sick leave after entering
the DROP.
Interest in the participant’s DROP account shall follow the window
established in Act 44. It is expressly understood that the Township
is not guaranteeing a particular interest rate during DROP
participation.

8. DEFERRED COMPENSATION

8.1.

All members of the ASSOCIATION shall be eligible to participate in an
employee savings plan (457 Deferred Compensation Plan).

9. VACATION, HOLIDAYS AND LEAVE

9.1.

VACATION LEAVE

9.1.1. Annual vacation leave will be granted in accordance with the following
schedule:

Service Time Vacation Time

Completion of one (1) year of service Ten (10) days

Completion of (5) years of service Fifteen (15) days

Completion of ten (10) years of service Twenty (20) days

Completion of fifteen (15) years of service Twenty-Five (25) days

Completion of twenty (20) years of service Twenty-Six (26) days

Completion of twenty-one (21) yearsof service | Twenty-Seven (27) days

11
Completion of twenty-two (22) years of service  Twenty-Light (28) days

Completion of twenty-three (23) years of service Twenty-Nine (29) days

Completion of twenty-four (24) years of service ‘Thirty (30) days

9.1.2.

9.1.3.

9.1.4.

9.1.5.

9.1.6.

9.1.7.

9.1.8.

9.1.9.

9.1.10.

Fourteen (14) days advance notice will be given by the Township in the
event a scheduled vacation must be postponed. Members shall have the
option of taking vacation leave on either a work schedule basis or on a
calendar week basis.

Annual vacation schedule will be posted on or about January 1st of each
year; said schedule to include the period January 1 through December 31.
All paid leave, including vacation and personal days, must be selected by
December 15.

Solely for the purpose of vacation, seniority shall be determined by length
of service to the Department.

The scheduling of dispatcher's vacation will be maintained separately and
unrclated to the scheduling of police officer's vacation.

If vacation must be canceled, the officer canceling the vacation may not
bump a junior officer from his posted vacation unless the cancellation was
departmentally implemented. Ifa schedule change is made during the year,
posted vacation shall not be canceled because of an overlap with another
member's selection. The posted vacation may be adjusted by the member
if there is a change in pass days.

At least five (5) days of vacation must be submitted by all officers as of
April 1 of cach year and the schedule of advance selections shall be posted

by April 30.

Single day vacation picks are permitted. Those made after April 30 shall
be granted, provided a five (5) day notice is given and unreasonable
overtime is not created (unreasonable being more than one member/shift
with a two (2) day overlap of other vacation posted). Fifty percent (50%)
of a member's vacation time may be chosen in single day units.

Full week(s) (i.¢., five (5) consecutive days of vacation) may also overlap
up to two (2) days providing an unreasonable amount of overtime is not
created by the overlap.

‘The above format is based upon a full five (5) member squad.

NOTE: The aforementioned selection process with respect to single day
picks made after April 30 which create overtime, is experimental for the

12
9,2.

9.3.

9.1.11.

term of this Agreement and must be mutually agreed upon for future
contracts.

If an employee misses more than 480 hours of scheduled work in a
calendar year after exhausting paid leave (sick, vacation, personal and time
owed), for a non-work related illness or injury, the employee’s vacation
shall be prorated in the subsequent calendar year. The measuring period
shall begin January 1, 2014.

SICK LEAVE

9.2.1.

9.2.2.

9.2.3.

9.2.4.

Sick leave will be accumulated at the rate of ten (10) days per year to a
maximum accumulation of one hundred and twenty-five (125) days.
Officers shall receive six (6) sick days during their first year of hire and ten
days each year thereafter. Any officer who has accumulated one hundred
and twenty-five (125) days, may elect, by December 1* of each year, to be
paid for any unused sick days in excess of one hundred and twenty-five
(125) days, at a rate of $125.00 per day.

Members must call off sick at least one and one-half (1-1/2) hours before
the start of their scheduled shift.

A bonus personal day will be granted to any member who takes no sick
days for a period of 182 consecutive days. No more than two (2) bonus
personal days can be earned in any calendar year, based upon twenty-
six (26) pay periods per year. Bonus personal days must be scheduled with
three (3) days advance notice to the Township.

Upon retirement, all accumulated sick leave to a maximum of One
Hundred Twenty-Five (125) days shall be paid at the rate of One Hundred
($100.00) Dollars per day into the officer’s existing VEBA Plan. It is
specifically understood that the existing annual buyback provisions set
forth in Article 9.2.1, above shall remain unchanged.

HOLIDAYS

9.3.1.

Ten (10) holidays per year will be granted. Holidays shall be Easter,
Memorial Day, Independence Day, Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Day,
New Year's Day, Good Friday, Labor Day, Columbus Day, and Veteran's
Day. In addition, two (2) times the normal hourly rate shall be paid for the
3 PM to 11 PM shift worked on Christmas Eve and New Years Eve (no
pyramiding).

Compensation for holidays shall be as follows:

 

9.3.1.1. If a member does not work on a holiday, said member shall
receive eight (8) hours regular shift pay.

9.3.1.2. If a member works on a holiday, said member shall be
reimbursed in one of the following options:
13
9.3.1.2.1. Fight (8) hours regular shift pay and sixtcen
(16) hours holiday pay.

9,3.1.2.2. Eight (8) hours regular shift pay and twelve
(12) hours holiday pay and a compensatory
day off.

* These options apply to all ten (10) holidays.

9,3.1.3. If a member works a double shift on any of the
aforementioned holidays, he shall receive double time for the
second shilt worked.

9.3.1.4, Officers not working a holiday shall be eligible for holiday
pay providing they work their last scheduled workday before
the holiday and their first scheduled workday afier the
holiday.

9.4. PERSONAL DAYS

9.4.1.

Four (4) personal days will be granted. All requests for personal day leave
must be approved by the Chief of Police or his designate and may not be
converted to pay. The days should be requested three (3) days in advance
or up to one (1) hour prior to the shift requested when an unusual
circumstance exists and approval is given by the Chief of Police or his
designate. Approval of personal days, when possible, will be made within
twenty-four (24) hours after the time the day is requested. Once granted,
the day cannot be revoked. No personal days may be taken on holidays
without approval of the Chief of Police. Personal days for new employees
will be administered as follows:

9.4.1.1. New members will have days prorated from hiring date to
January 1 of the following year. A new member can earn
one (1) day per four months of service with a maximum of
two (2) days in the first year. If the member leaves before the
probation period is completed, a deduction from pay will be
made based upon cight (8) hours times the hourly rate paid
for each day taken.

9,5. BEREAVEMENT LEAVE

9.5.1.

When death occurs in a member's immediate family, i.e., legal spouse,
mother, father, son, daughter, a member, upon request, may be excused for
up to four (4) consecutively scheduled days which includes the day of the
funeral. In the event of the death of the member's mother-in-law,
father-in-law, brother, sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, natural
grandparents, or grandchildren, a member, upon request, may be excused
for up to three (3) consecutively scheduled days which includes the day of
14
9.6.

9.7.

the funeral. In the event of the death of a member's aunt, uncle, or first
cousin, a member may, upon request, be excused for up to one (1) day,
which shall be the day of the funeral. The member shall receive pay for
any such excused scheduled shift provided it is established that he attended
the funeral. Payment shall be eight (8) times his normal hourly earnings.
An employee shall not receive funeral leave when it duplicates pay
received for time not worked for any other reason. Time thus paid will not
be counted as hours worked for purposes of overtime, with respect to an
eight (8) hour day. In the event that all other leave has been exhausted,
funeral leave (emergency leave) may be granted in the event of an extreme
personal emergency in the sole discretion of the Township Manager.

TIME OWED DAY

9.6.1.

A time owed day can be requested at a member's discretion; however, the
time owed day may not be requested more than thirty (30) days in advance
and the decision to grant this day does not have to be issued until five (5)
days prior to the date requested to be off. The first officer requesting time
owed days on any date will be granted that time provided that, in the
opinion of the Chief or his designated representative, no critical manpower
shortage or overtime would result if the time owed day is granted.
Approval or disapproval of time owed day when possible, will be made
with in twenty-four (24) hours the day is requested. Once granted, the day
cannot be revoked. A maximum of twelve (12) time owed days may be
carried over from one year to the next. At year's end, in the event a
member has between twelve (12) days and fifteen (15) days accrued, the
Township agrees to buy back up to three (3) days at the rate of four (4)
hours overtime for each day.

9.6.2. Time owed days may be requested up to one hour before the start of the
member's scheduled shift and may be granted by the Chief of Police or his
designated representative if overtime will not be created. Time owed days
may only be taken in eight (8) hour increments.

9.6.3. In lieu of eight (8) hours overtime pay, an officer may elect to take a time-
owed day. These time-owed days shall not create any overtime when used.

WORK DAY TRADES

9.7.1. Member may elect to trade working days with other member of equal rank
subject to the following conditions:

9.7.2. Member will submit a notice of trade request to the Chief of Police for
approval as far in advance as possible, but not less than forty-eight (48)
hours prior to the shift change.

9.7.3. If the member who has agreed to work is sick or fails to report, the

responsibility for the shift hours will revert to the originally scheduled

15
10.

INSURANCE

10.1.

9.7.4,

9.7.5.

individual. ‘The originally scheduled individual must report for duty if the
replacement fails to report to duty.

The Township will not be responsible for any overtime generated by work
day trades. The originally scheduled officer is responsible for the payment.

The Township will not be responsible for rescheduling work days traded or
for any other record keeping associated with work day trades.

Medical/Surgical: Full family coverage of Bluc Cross/Blue Shield Plan or
equivalent will be provided to all members.

10.1.1.

10.1.2,

10.1.3.

10.1.4.

The Township shall be permitted to implement the Highmark 1250/2500
first dollar deductible plan which it proposed at the hearing. Implementation
shall be as soon as practicable after issuance of this Award. The Township
shall pay 100% of the in-network deductible. This deductible shall be
funded directly by the Township via HRA (Health Reimbursement
Account), such that the Officers shall not make out of pocket payments to
meet in network deductible expenses.

Flex Card — Effective with the implementation of the new plan identified in
Paragraph 3, the Township shall provide cach Officer with an annual
flexible spending account card containing $200.00 for the purposes of
meeting additional expenses, such as higher co-pay amounts, associated with
the plan design change. The Township shall fund the $200.00 yearly

payment.

Healtheare Premium Contribution — Officers shall contribute towards the
monthly health insurance premiums as follows:

01/01/2047 20 6% 7.5%

01/01/2018 21 65% 8.00%

01/01/2049 22 7% 8.00%

This payment shall be made by bi-weekly or monthly payroll deduction.
This provision does not apply to the post retirement benefit set forth in
Article 10 of the Agreement.

Cadillac Tax - If the Township becomes subject to the ACA’s Cadillac Tax,
the parties agree that the Township shall have the right to reopen the contract
to negotiate and/or arbitrate Health Plan changes or other remedics to
address or eliminate said tax liability. The arbitrator process in such an
event shall be interest arbitration per Act 111 with the panel chairperson
selected in accordance with the grievance procedure. The cost of the neutral
arbitrator shall be split evenly between the parties.

16
10.2.

10.3.

10.4.

10.5.

10.6.

10.7.

Dental: Full family coverage of Blue Shield High Option Coverage or equivalent
will be provided to members.

Eye Care Program: The employer will continue to provide and pay for entirely, a
family eye care program for members.

Prescription Drug Program: The employer will provide a family coverage
prescription drug program.

False Arrest: False arrest coverage will be provided for all members.

Group Term: Group term insurance in the amount of One Hundred Twenty-Five
Thousand ($125,000) Dollars for basic life and double indemnity for accidental
death will be provided for all members.

10.6.1. Group Term Life Insurance Step Down: the active Officer Life
Insurance benefit shall be as follows:

Up to Age 65 $125,000
Age 65 $81,250 (35% Reduction)
Age 70 $62,500 (50% Reduction)

Accident and [ness Insurance

10.7.1. All police officers who are disabled on the job but not qualified for the
permanent pension disability program and all members who are disabled
due to non-job related sickness or injury shall be provided with the
following benefit:

10.7.1.1. 50% of base pay for a maximum period of twenty-six weeks
(26), or until social security benefits begin;

10.7.1.2. Said benefit shall start after all accrued sick leave benefits
have been exhausted without a "wait" period, but shall not be
paid in addition to accrued sick leave benefits or workmen's
compensation benefits;

10.7.1.3. The maximum time period will be extended to a maximum
of fifty-two (52) weeks if at any time during the contract
period the social security "wait" period is extended beyond
twenty-six (26) weeks.

10.7.2. The Social Security disability determination will be used to determine
Township disability. No police officer shall be considered disabled if his
incapacity resulted from addiction to alcohol or narcotics, from
participation in a felonious criminal act, or from an_ intentional
self-inflicted injury.

17
10.7.3. The Township shall provide, at its expense, the Blue Cross - Blue Shield -
Major Medical program in cffect for the officers who retire after January 1,
1989, subject to the following conditions:

Retirement Healthcare — Effective January 1, 1999 the Township shall
contribute the sum of $1,000 per year per officer to individual accounts in
the name of each officer in accordance with regulations in effect under the
Internal Revenue Code §501 (c) (9) known as a Voluntary Employer's
Beneficiary Association (VEBA) Plan. The parties agree that the PEBSCO
Plan is an eligible plan under this provision. Upon retirement for service or
disability, each retiree shall have the option to accept the full amount of
money deposited in each officer’s account with accrued interest, in Licu of
any obligation to provide post-retirement medical benefits. If the officer
elects to receive post-retirement medical benefits, the retiree shall forfeit
any monies deposited in the retiree’s account which shall then become the
property of the Township and the Township shall provide, at its expense,
the same group healthcare coverage in effect for the active officers to the
retiree, retiree’s spouse and retiree’s dependents at the rate in effect for the
active officers at the time of reliree’s retirement. Any increase shall be
borne by the retiree. Retiree and/or retiree’s spouse may be employed, but
if either receives or is offered at no cost to them, employer paid healthcare
equal to or of superior quality to that of the Township’s, then the retiree
and/or retiree’s spouse as the case may be, must (1) accept the same and
the Township shall discontinue the coverage until such times as the retiree
or retiree’s spouse is no longer covered by the other employer or (2) in the
alternative, if the retiree and/or retiree’s spouse is employed, and if either is
offered at nominal charge, healthcare equal to or of superior quality to that
of the Township’s, the Township shall have the option to pay said nominal
charge, rather than requiring the Township to provide full coverage and pay
the cost thereof. In the event that coverage would cease, the Township shall
again provide the same healthcare coverage in effect for the active officers
to the retiree, spouse and dependents until Medicare age. When the retiree
reaches Medicare age, the Township will pay the premiums of a Medicare
supplement comparable to 65+ (Security Bluc 65) to the retiree and spouse.

All current officers who are currently pension eligible as of October 1,
2014 and their spouses will receive a 65+ Supplement al no cost to them
regardless of whether they accept the post-retirement healthcare or the

VEBA.

All current officers and their spouses (including the three (3) hired in 2014)
who are not currently pension eligible will receive the Medicare
Supplement at no cost to them if they take the post-retirement healthcare.
If these officers select the VEBA, they and their spouses will receive the
Medicare Supplement but will pay any increases in the premium after the
first year.

Kach employee hired after October 1, 2014 will be eligible for a higher
VERA contribution of $2,250 per year to individual accounts in the name

18
10.7.4.

of each officer in accordance with the Internal Revenue Code regulations
cited above. They shall not be eligible for any form of post-retirement
hospitalization coverage nor for the Medicare Supplement or any other
Medicare Supplement.

The following applies only to officers who are eligible for post-retirement
hospitalization or a Medicare Supplement. Ifa spouse of a retired officer
who becomes eligible for Medicare but who is not herself yet eligible for
Medicare and she elects COBRA, the Township will continue to pay for
individual coverage for period not to exceed 12-months (during COBRA)
following the date on which the retired officer reaches Medicare age. If,
after twelve (12) months, the spouse is still not eligible for Medicare, the
Township will make a contribution to the spouse’s medical insurance
premium equivalent to the cost of Medicare eligible retiree’s Medicare
Supplement until the spouse is Medicare eligible.

If a spouse reaches Medicare age before the retired officer, the spouse must
accept Medicare coverage and the Township shall pay the cost of the same
Medicare Supplement available to retirees receiving Medicare Supplement:

When a retiree reaches Medicare age, the Township will pay the
monthly premium for the Security Blue HMO value RX plan for the
retiree and spouse and, effective January 1, 2020, will pay each
participant $45.00 monthly in addition to paying the premium. (This
is a change from the original amount of $30.00 contained in the
Memorandum of Understanding dated April 28, 2017 in reference to
65+ Security Blue. For purposes of this change only, the increase from
$30.00 to $45.00 shall apply to current as well as future retirees.)

The Township’s annual VEBA contribution for Officers hired on or after
October 1, 2014 shall be as follows:

01/012017 $2250 Effective January 1, 2020: $2,400
91/01/2018 $2,300 Effective January 1, 2021: $2,450
01/01/2019 $2,350 Effective January 1, 2022: $2,500

Officers participating in the DROP shall not be eligible for long-term
disability insurance. The Township shall provide long-term disability
coverage to officers, which reimburses officers at the rate of sixty-six
percent (66%) of the base pay. This coverage shall commence after
exhaustion of the twenty-six (26) weeks sickness and accident coverage
described in paragraph (7) herein. Total disability means, during the first
twenty-four (24) months of disability, the inability of the individual to
perform the substantial and material duties of his occupation or
employment for which he is qualified or may engage in any occupation or
employment for which he is qualified or may reasonably become qualified
by reason of his education, training or experience.

19
11. RETIREMENT LIFE INSURANCE

11.1.

Upon retirement, all officers (*) with at Icast fiftcen (15) years of service shall be
covered by retirement term life insurance. The amount of such insurance shall be
Fifteen Thousand ($15,000). Dollars and the cost of such insurance shall be paid
by the employer. (*officers retiring after 1/1/2014)

12. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

12.1.

STEP 2

SECTION 1

Grievances are limited to matters involving interpretation of this Agreement, and
also to include all matters of discipline and all mattcrs under the Heart and Lung
Act.

By the execution of THIS Agreement, the Township waives no rights to remove
arbitration matters covered in Sections 644 and 645 of the First Class Township
Code to the jurisdiction of the Civil Service Board in the event the Township
challenges and adjudicates the matter and prevails in a final court decision.

STEP 1

12.1.1. The member, either alone or accompanied by a representative of the
bargaining unit, or the bargaining unit itself, shall present the grievance in
writing to the Chief of Police or his designated representative within
fifteen (15) days of its occurrence or knowledge of its occurrence. The
Chief shall report his decision in writing to the member and the bargaining
unit representative within seven (7) days of its presentation.

12.1.2. In the event that the grievance is not settled at Step 1, an appeal must be
presented in writing by the member or the bargaining unit representative
to the Township Manager within seven (7) days after response to Stcp 1 is
due. The Township Manager or his designated representative shall
respond in writing to the member and the bargaining unit representative
within seven (7) days after receipt of the appeal.

STEP 3

12.1.3, In the event that the grievance has not been satisfactorily resolved in Step
2, the bargaining unit representative may initiate an appeal by serving
upon the Township Manager a notice in writing of his intent to proceed to
arbitration within seven (7) days after the receipt of the Step 2 decision is
due.

The arbitrator is to be selected by the parties jomtly within seven (7) days
after the notice has been given. If the parties fail to agree on an arbitrator,
20
12.1.4.

12.1.5.

12.1.6.

12.1.7.

12.1.8.

12.1.9,

12.1.10.

either party may request the American Arbitration Association to submit a
list of three (3) possible arbitrators.

The parties shall meet within seven (7) days of the receipt of said list for
the purpose of selecting the arbitrator by alternating striking one name
from the list, until only one name remains. The employer strikes the first
name.

The arbitrator shall neither add to, subtract from, nor modify the
provisions of this Agreement, or of any other arbitration awards. The
arbitrator shall confine himself to the precise issues submitted for
arbitration. The arbitrator has no authority to determine any other issues
not submitted to him. The decision of the arbitrator shall be final and
binding on both parties. The arbitrator shall be requested to issue his
decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing.

All of the time limits contained in this article may be extended by mutual
agreement. If the employer fails to respond in a timely manner in any step
of the grievance procedure, the grievance is automatically resolved in
favor of the grievant.

All fees and expenses of the arbitrator shall be divided equally between
the parties. Each party shall bear the cost of preparing and presenting its
own case,

An aggrieved member and bargaining unit representative and a reasonable
amount of witnesses shall be granted reasonable time during working
hours to process grievances in accordance with this section without loss of
pay or leave time.

The bargaining unit must receive notice of any grievance filed and must
have an opportunity to appear with the grievant at all steps of the
grievance procedure.

Jn an alternative, the member may pursue his complaint with the Civil
Service Board if the complaint is within the Civil Service Board's
jurisdiction. The member may only select one of the two options, and
whichever option the member selects constitutes an irrevocable selection.

13. MISCELLANEOUS

13.1.

All new police officers shall be hired under the rules of the contract except that new
officers shall not be entitled to annual educational bonus as described in Article 5
of this Agreement during the Police Officer Grade 1 status only. Clothing
allowance to be prorated for probationary police officers.

21
14.

15.

13.2,

13.3.

13.4.

All full-time police officers have the option to work additional shifts; that is, any
patrolman may work two (2) consecutive shifts (this would be a total of sixteen
(16) hours on a seniority basis in accordance with Section 5.3.2 of this Agrcement).

Auditor General pension change shall be grandfathered for existing employees.
Unfair Labor Practices will be withdrawn with prejudice. In the event of a
proposed pension plan change, the Township shall provide the Association with
advanced written notice of the change, and shall give the Association reasonable
time to review and respond to the change(s), not to exceed sixty (60) days.

The Township proposed a limitation on the period for which insurance will be
provided to employees on extended leaves, including those related illness and job-
related injuries but withdrew this proposal with the Association’s Agreement that
said proposal and withdrawal will not be raiscd in any subsequent grievance
arbitration or other proceedings dealing with the Township’s attempt, should it
occur, to cxtinguish an employee’s insurance coverage.

SUPREMACY OF LAWS AND REGULATIONS

14.1. The public interest in the accomplishment of the purpose of the Police Department
is paramount.

14.2. ‘Therefore, in the administration of all matters covered by this Agreement, officials
and members are governed by the provisions of any cxisting and future laws or
regulations or amendments thereto which may be applicable.

14.2. This Agreement is at all times to be applicd and construed subject to and in
accordance with such laws and regulations as they now exist and as thcy may, {rom
time to time, be amended.

NOTICE

15.1. All notices pursuant here to intended for the parties shall be in writing and served by

first class U.S. Mail or by hand delivery verified by receipt therefore as follows:

15.1.1. As to the Township:
Township of Upper St. Clair
1820 McLaughlin Run Road
Upper St. Clair, PA 15241
Atin: Matthew R. Serakowski, Township Manager
With a copy to:
Robert L. McTiernan, Esquire
Tucker/Arensberg
1500 One PPG Place
Pittsburgh, PA 15222

15.1.2. As to the Association:
Association of Police Officers

22
15.2.

15.3.

of the Township of Upper St. Clair
1820 McLaughlin Run Road
Upper St. Clair, PA 15241

Attn: Scott Bly

With a copy to:

Eric C. Stoltenberg, Esquire

Lightman, Welby, Stoltenberg & Caputo
330 Grant Street, Suite 2620

Pittsburgh, PA 15219

15.1.3. Each of parties reserve the right to designate such other persons either in
addition to, or in lieu of those named aforesaid to receive service of notice
on their behalf, upon notice to the other party.

This Agreement sets forth the full and complete contract and understanding between
the parties hereto, and any and all new contracts an arbitration awards are hereby

deemed to be merged herein and made a part hereof.

This Agreement may not be altered, amended or modified in whole or in part except
by a writing executed by the parties hereto.

23
ATTEST: TOWNSHIP OF UPPER ST. CLAIR

. ret Dre estas wifetde——

Mark S. Maiisfield, Matthew R. Serakowski,
Assistant Township ir: ) Township Manager

ATTEST/WITNESS

 

 

 

indenfelser

PYC
a» Mf Ly

Mic héel Lebetz

» QA SL =

Baek Cough in

24
