Employment Agreement 
between 

Carnegie Borough 
(Employer) 
and 

Carnegie Borough Police Department 
(Employee/Police Officer) 
January 01, 2019 -December 31, 2023 
Table of Contents 
ARTICLE I: EMPLOYMENT......................................................... Page 3 ARTICLE 2: TERM..................................................................... Page 3 ARTICLE 3: DUTIES................................................................... Page 3 ARTICLE 4: BASIC WAGE........................................................... Page 3 ARTICLE 5: OVERTIME/WORK.ING HOURS.................................... Page 4 ARTICLE 6: VACATIONS............................................................. Page 5 ARTICLE 7: HOLIDAYS AND PERSONAL DAYS.............................. Page 6 ARTICLES:LONGEVITYPAY...................................................... Page? ARTICLE 9: SICK LEA VE............................................................. Page 7 ARTICLE 10:DEATHLEAVE ......................................................... Page? ARTICLE 11:LEAVEOFABSENCE ................................................ Page8 ARTICLE 12: HEALTH INSURANCE............................................... Page 8 ARTICLE 13: LIFE INSURANCE..................................................... Page 9 ARTICLE 14: FALSE ARREST AND RELATED INSURANCE ................ Page 9 ARTICLE 15: POLICE PENSION ORDINANCE................................... Page 9 ARTICLE 16: ADMINISTRATION................................................... Page 9 ARTICLE 17: COURT APPEARANCE.............................................. Page 10 ARTICLE 18: UNIFORM ALLOWANCE........................................... Page 10 ARTICLE 19: DAMAGE/LOSS OF PERSONAL PROPERTY ................... Page 11 ARTICLE 20: VEHICLES............................................................... Page 11 ARTICLE 21: BODY ARMOR ......................................................... Page 11 ARTICLE 22: SCHOOL OR PROGRAM ATTENDANCE ........................ Page 11 ARTICLE 23: LAY-OFFS............................................................... Page 12 ARTICLE 24: JUST CAUSE............................................................ Page 12 ARTICLE 25: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE......................................... Page 12 ARTICLE 26: MAINTENANCE OF MEMBERSHIP............................... Page 13 SIGNATURE PAGE ...................................................................... Page 14 
EMPLOYMENT AGREEMENT 
It is hereby agreed between the Borough of Carnegie, a municipal corporation in the 
Commonwealth ofPennsylvania, whose address is One Veterans Way, Carnegie, 
Pennsylvania 15106, hereinafter referred to as the "Employer" 
and 
The Carnegie Police Department, an unincorporated association in the Borough of 
Carnegie, and the members hereof, hereinafter referred to as a Police Officers that, 
Whereas, the Employer desires to employ the Police Officers to provide police protection 
for the property, residents, and visitors in the Borough of Carnegie, and 
Whereas, the Police Officers desire to be employed by the Borough to provide said 
protection; 
Now, therefore, intending to be legally bound hereby, the parties hereto covenant and agree as follows: 

ARTICLE 1: EMPLOYMENT 
The Employer hereby employs the Police Officers and the Police Officers hereby accept employment with the Employer upon the terms and conditions hereinafter set forth. 

ARTICLE 2: TERM 
This Agreement shall be in effect from January 1, 2019 through December 31, 2023. 

ARTICLE 3: DUTIES 
The Police Officers shall provide police protection in the Borough of Carnegie at the direction of the Chief of Police and the Mayor ofthe Borough of Carnegie. 

ARTICLE 4: BASIC WAGE 
The following is a list of the basic hourly wage schedule for a Patrol Officer and Sergeant (employees) for the term of this Agreement: 
2019  2020  2021  2022  2023  
Sergeant  $41.75  $43.00  $44.29  $45.62  $46.99  
Patrol Officer $39.72  $40.91  $42.14  $43.40  $44.70  

The yearly wages shall be paid in twenty-six equal installments (every two weeks), as earned, during the term of this agreement. When a Sergeant is not in charge of a shift, a patrol officer who is senior or designated by the Chief of Police shall be paid at the Sergeants hourly rate; however, that rate shall not exceed the difference between a Sergeant and the highest paid patrol officer. 
A shift differential shall be paid to each officer for the following shifts: an additional $0.35 per hour for each officer working the 3 p.m. to 11 p.m. and the 7 p.m. to 3 a.m. shift; an additional $0.45 per hour for each officer working the 11 p.m. to 7 a.m. shift. 
All newly hired officers shall be subject to a one (1) year probationary period. Newly hired officers shall be paid 80% of the basic salary for the first year ofemployment, 85% for the second year, 90% for the third year, 95% for the fourth year and 100% of the basic salary for the fifth and each additional year 
ARTICLE 5: OVERTIME/WORKING HOURS 
Overtime shall be voluntary unless there is an emergency. Scheduled events are not to be considered as an emergency, however, if all officers turn down the overtime request, then it will be considered an emergency and the Chief of Police can assign the overtime. 
The Employer shall maintain an overtime list with the names of all officers listed by seniority. Overtime will be compiled on this list and this list shall include the compilation of the number of hours ofovertime worked or which could have been worked but were declined and shall include any period of overtime of one hour or more. Whenever an officer is called for overtime, the officer with the least amount ofovertime hours compiled on the list for that year to date shall be the first officer to be called for overtime. 
Each officer shall be contacted in order of whoever has the least amount of overtime compiled until an officer is secured for duty. The number of hours shall be inclusive of both those hours worked and those hours that could have been worked. Iftwo or more officers have the same amount of hours, then the most senior officer shall be called first. 
When a newly hired officer is included on the list of officers eligible for overtime, the 
starting amount of hours for this officer shall be the average number of hours ofall the 
officers currently on the eligible overtime list. 
The Employer is not required to call an officer for overtime and no hours will be included on the aforesaid list for those hours that could have been worked for any officer who is the cause of the overtime, is on vacation, or workmen's compensation, disability, sick leave or military leave during the calendar week of the overtime, or if acceptance of the overtime would cause the officer to work more than 16 consecutive hours. 
Ifan officer is on vacation and desires to be eligible for overtime during their vacation, the officer shall notify the Chief of Police prior to starting their vacation. An officer desiring to be eligible for overtime while on vacation shall be the last officer to be called on the eligible overtime list. All other provisions ofthis section shall apply to an officer desiring to be eligible for overtime while on vacation. 
.ill officer shall be paid only for time actually worked in the appropriate premium rate. An officer called out at any time shall be paid from the time they begin work and not at the time when they are called. An officer called out must report to work within one hour from the time of the call, unless the shift in question starts later. If an officer is not immediately available to respond to a call out, the Employer may proceed to call the next officer on the list. 
An officer shall receive time and one-half for time worked in excess of eight (8) hours per day or forty ( 40) hours per week. Vacation time shall be considered as time worked, but sick time and military leave will not be considered as time worked for overtime purposes. 
Except to the extent that the overtime will be compiled on the annual overtime list, the aforesaid call-out procedure above will not apply and the Employer shall not be obliged to abide by such procedure whenever: 
I. It is determined at the sole discretion of the Employer that a specific officer is desired for an assignment requiring specific skills or attributes; and or 
2. 
An officer is undertaking or engaged in a continuing assignment from a prior shift; and or 

3. 
An emergency situation exists; and or 

4. 
An officer is participating in any training or schooling. 


Off-duty court time shall not be included in the call-out procedure or the annual overtime list. 
ARTICLE 6: VACATIONS 
Police officers earn are entitled to vacation based on the following years of service. Police officers who work less than a full year will earn vacation based on a standard pro-rated basis. For example: a police officer who works 5 months of the year will earn 5/12 of his/her normal vacation benefit. Vacation earned during the year may be used in the 
following year.  
YEARS OF SERVICE  PAID VACATION  
1 Year  1 Week (5 days)  
2 Years  2 Weeks (10 days)  
5 Years  3 Weeks (15 days)  
10 Years  4 Weeks (20 days)  
15 Years  5 Weeks (25 days)  

The choice of vacation periods shall be made on a seniority basis according to the date of original employment of all police officers. The police officer having the greatest seniority shall choose a maximum of2 weeks vacation in a schedule ofavailable weeks prepared by the Chief of Police or his designee on or about January 1 ofeach year. The officer having the next lower seniority shall then choose of their 2 weeks of vacation dates. 
After all officers have chosen a maximum of 2 weeks' vacation dates, the process restarts where all officers, in order of their seniority, select the balance of the vacation time to which they are entitled. Officers who have 3 or more weeks of vacation time may at this time choose one week of their remaining vacation time in individual days or as a full week(s) ifthey so choose. It is permissible for 2 officers to be on vacation at one time solely at the discretion of the Chief of Police for scheduling and based on conditions in the Borough at that time. An officer must actually perform work in any given year before the officer shall be eligible for an actual vacation during said year. 
Officers will be paid a minimum of 4 hours overtime at Sargent's rate for any call out, detail, or assignment where the officer is providing non-borough related police work. ( examples: traffic detail for Penn Dot or a utility). Officers will be paid a minimum of2 hours overtime for borough related police work for any call out, detail, or assignment. Police work for Carlynton events is considered borough related police work and officers will be paid overtime accordingly. 
ARTICLE 7: HOLIDAYS AND PERSONAL DAYS 
Each police officer shall be paid for the following holidays whether or not the officer works. If the officer works the holiday, the officer shall be paid 16 additional straight time hours at the officer's base pay rate. If the officer does not work on the holiday because the day it falls on is that officers pass day, the officer shall be paid 8 additional straight time hours at that officer's base pay rate in addition to their regularly scheduled 8-hour day and 40-hour week. 
The holidays are:  
1. President's Day  6. Labor Day  
2. Good Friday  7. Veteran's Day  
3. Easter Sunday  8. Thanksgiving Day  
4. Memorial Day  9. Christmas Day  
5. Fourth ofJuly  10. New Years Day  
The holiday shall be the observed day.  

Holiday pay shall be paid at premium rate for all hours worked during the officer's shift, provide the majority of the officer's shift is within the required holiday. In the event that an officer works from 1900 to 0700 hrs the premium rate shall be paid provided the start of the shift is within said holiday. 
Officers shall become ineligible for holiday pay under this section ifeither: 
1. 
The officer is scheduled to work on any such holiday but does not work due to sick leave or bereavement leave. 

2. 
The officer fails to work as scheduled or assigned either on their last scheduled workday prior to the day on which the holiday is observed, or their first scheduled workday following the day on which the holiday is observed; unless they have failed to work because of death in the immediate family or because of similar good cause. 


Each employee shall be paid straight time pay for each of four (4) Personal Days. An 
employee must request the use of a Personal Day at least 3 days in advance. Ifan 
employee is required to work on an approved and scheduled Personal Day, the employee 
shall be paid double time pay for that day. The Chief of Police may approve the use of a 
Personal Day with less than 3 days notice under exceptional circumstances. 
Police officers should make every effort to use Personal Days in the year they are earned. In the event an officer does not use the allotted Personal Days, those days may be carried over to the next year to be used at the discretion of the Chief of Police. Police officers will not be paid for any unused Personal Days. 
ARTICLE 8: LONGEVITY PAY (review closely} 
Police officers shall be paid a longevity pay for years of service with the Employer. The longevity schedule shall be as follows: 
YEARS OF SERVICE/LONGEVITY PAY PER YEAR 
1-4 $0 5-9 $500 
10-14 $1000 15-19 $1500 20-24 $2000 25+ $2500 
Officers total yearly increases will be calculated based on the following: 
2019 -50% of the agreed increase 2020 -paid at the above scale 
The pay per year shall be divided into twelve equal installments and shall be included in the first pay of each month, or a police officer can elect to have a lump sum for their specified amount paid to them in the first pay of December each year. 
ARTICLE 9: SICK LEA VE 
Each police officer shall accrue 15 days of sick leave per year. A police officer who has accumulated one hundred (I 00) days of sick leave shall receive $100.00 per day for all unused sick days after the 100th day accumulated. 
Police officers who work less than a full year will earn sick leave based on a standard pro­rated basis. For example: a police officer who works 5 months ofthe year will earn 5/12 of his/her normal sick leave benefit. 
New hired officers shall accrue IO days of sick leave for their first year of employment, I0 days for their second year, IO days for their third year, IO days for their fourth year and 15 days for their fifth and each additional year of employment. 
Upon retirement, officers shall be paid thirty-five ($35.00) dollars per day for unused sick leave to maximum ofone hundred (100) days. 
SICK LEA VE POOLING 
An anonymous Sick Leave Bank will be created so officers, at their discretion, will have the opportunity to donate their won sick time to benefit a fellow officer in need. 
Applications to withdraw hours from the Sick Leave Pool must be for the officer's own personal (not family) catastrophic injury or illness. 
Catastrophic is defined as a severe condition or combination ofconditions affecting the mental or physical health of the officer which has resulted in a life-threatening condition and/or has had a major impact on life functions. Such life functions shall include, but not be limited to, the loss of physical senses, the loss of physiological processes or the loss of limb. 
Prior to being granted hours from the Sick Leave Pool, the officer must have exhausted all oftheir own personally accrued sick, vacation and compensatory leave including the officer's personal days. 
Pooled Sick Leave hours will be paid at the lesser ofthe donation officer's pay rate or the receiving officer's pay rate. 
In order to avoid officers feeling they have to donate because of fear of retribution from ranking or senior officers, the donations will be made to a "Pooling Bank" and not directly to an individual officer. 
The "Pooling Bank" will be maintained by the Chief of Police or his designee and will be made available for review by current officers of the Carnegie Police Department. 
Donations of sick time will be made anonymously. 
ARTICLE 10: DEATH LEAVE 
In the event of death of the spouse or child of a police officer, emergency leave of up to 5 days shall be granted to the officer. In the event of the death ofthe mother, father, mother­in-law, father-in-law, sister, or brother of a police officer, emergency leave ofup to 3 days shall be granted to the officer. In the event of the death ofa step mother, step father, grandmother or grandfather, emergency leave of 1 day shall be granted to the officer. An officer shall receive their regular straight time compensation while on death leave. 
ARTICLE 11: LEAVE OF ABSENCE 
The Employer will allow one officer at any given time to take up to six months leave of 
absence for any reason except for the purpose of assuming other employment unless 
approved by Borough Council. The Borough Council retains the right to extend or grant 
other leaves ofabsence to other officers. 

ARTICLE12:HEALTHINSURANCE 
The Employee shall pay $40.00 per pay towards the cost of the following insurance 
benefits for each police officer and their legal dependents during the term ofthis contract. 
Health Benefits: The health benefits insurance program provided to police officers and their eligible dependents shall be Highmark PPO Blue $1250. In the event any less costly alternate health insurance program becomes available during the term of this agreement which will provide at least comparable insurance coverage for eligible retirees, police officers and their eligible dependents representatives of the Employer and the Employees shall meet and review the alternate health insurance program and attempt to agree that such less costly alternate program will replace the existing health insurance program. 
There will also be a mini-med plan in place to reimburse each police officer for the following amounts, 100% of the deductible which would be $1,250 per individual and $2,500 per family. Other expenses to be reimbursed include $10 per specialist office visit, $10 per brand name drug and $100 per emergency room visit. These reimbursements will occur through TEC Benefits. The Borough shall retain the right to seek out and retain another vendor in the event that TEC's fees and/or performance change significantly. 
In the event the current Highmark insurance/hospitalization plan is not accepted at UPMC hospitals or UPMC health care providers, the Police Officers shall have the right to reopen the agreement to address a possible change in carriers. 
Dental Insurance: The Dental Insurance program provided to the police officers shall be 
the United Concordia MEIT High Dental Option. 
Eye Care: The eye care insurance program provided to the police officers shall be Highmark Fashion Advantage Option 1. 
Retirement Benefits: Upon retirement ofeach individual police officer, the Employer 
shall continue to pay during the life ofthe retired individual the total cost of a Health Insurance plan for individual retiree only. The provision specifically excludes the spouse or any other dependent ofthe retiree. 
For the purpose of this subsection, "retirement" shall be defined as per Section 3 ofAct 600 of 1956, as amended, Police Pension Act, Section 1 or Ordinance 937 adopted January 10, 1978, as amended and service or non-service related disability retirement specifically excluded from definition and no individual retired by reason of disability shall be entitled to the provisions of this sub-paragraph. 
For the purpose ofthis subsection, "life" shall be defined as natural life or until the individual retiree becomes eligible for Medicare/Medicaid Benefits. 
Non-Service Sickness: The Employer shall also pay the total cost of a non-service sickness and accident insurance policy which provides a benefit of $400.00 per week for a total of 52 weeks for each police officer. 
Untimely death benefit: In the event of the death of an officer, in the line of duty or not, prior to reaching full retirement requirements, the borough will pay for the officer's survivor's healthcare coverage for an additional 2 months. 
ARTICLE 13: LIFE INSURANCE 
Each police officer shall be covered by a group life insurance policy purchased by the Employer in the amount of $75,000.00 with an additional $ I 10,000 benefit for accidental death. The said policy shall be paid for I 00% by the Employer and shall be in effect so long as a member is carried on the Employer payroll as a police officer and shall provide coverage whether or not the police officer is on or offduty. Any insurance now in effect or purchased here after, shall contain a statement by the insurer that both on or off duty coverage is afforded during the term of this Agreement. 
Upon retirement, each police officer who is eligible for a pension, shall be covered by a $5000.00 Term Live Insurance Policy to be paid by the Employer. Notification of the effective date ofcoverage shall be mailed by the insurance carrier providing said coverage directly to the insured person. 
ARTICLE 14: FALSE ARREST AND RELATED INSURANCE 
Each police officer shall be covered by personal injury liability insurance as described in the insurance exhibit attached hereto and marked as Exhibit "A" and shall include the following. 
(A) 
False arrest, detention; or imprisonment or malicious prosecution 

(B) 
Libel and Slander 

(C) 
Wrongful entry or eviction, or other invasion ofthe private occupancy 


The limits of liability provided shall be $500,000.00 each occurrence and $500,000.00 aggregate. 
ARTICLE 15: POLICE PENSION ORDINANCE AGREEMENT 
All regular full-time police officers shall receive pension benefits in accordance with the 
Carnegie Borough Uniform Employees Pension Plan Document. Officers hired before 
January I, 2015 may retire after 20 years of service per the "Early Retirement" ( 40%) 
provision of the Pension Plan. Officers hired after January I, 2015 will have the option to 
retire after 20 years of service, although the monthly benefit shall be calculated according 
to the governing formula under Act 600. 
ARTICLE 16: ADMINISTRATION 
The Agreement shall be construed to be applicable to all police officers, but the provisions relating to overtime, double time on holidays and compensation for Court appearances shall not be construed to allow the police officers to administer the provisions of the paragraphs relating thereto in their own discretion. Such provisions shall be administered by the Chief of Police. 
.Ouring normal business hours (Monday through Friday, 8:00 am to 4:00 pm) a police officer shall report off from work by contacting the Chief of Police. Report offs which occur outside of normal business hours will be made to the regional dispatch 9-1-1 or to the Chief of Police. The officer in charge at the time ofa report will then notify the Chief ofPolice or his designee. The Chief of Police will post and provide to each police officer the telephone numbers which may be used. At any time ofthe day, a report off to the Chiefs cell phone shall be sufficient, to satisfy the officer's obligation to report an absence from work. All report offs shall be made at the earliest practical time but no less than 2 hours before an officers next scheduled shift in order that necessary police coverage can be maintained in the Borough. 
A police officer must be given at least a 3-day notice from the Chief of Police or his designee for a change in work schedule, otherwise the officer may decline to accept the schedule change. 
ARTICLE 17: COURT APPEARANCE 
Each police officer who is required to appear before the Court of Common Pleas, Criminal Court, pre-trial Court hearing, Juvenile Court, a Grand Jury, a District Magistrate or any other court of record shall be permitted to retain any witness fee and mileage fee which may be paid to him. 
Each police officer who is required to appear in court during off-duty hours shall have a choice of the following: 
I. Pay at the rate ofone and one-halftimes the straight hourly rate for each hour of off-duty court time or, 
2. Receiving a day or a portion of a day off as compensatory time for each day or portion ofa day of off-duty court time. 
Compensatory time will be calculated at the rate of one and one-half times the off-duty time spent in court. However, such compensatory time is subject to the discretion of the Chief of Police for scheduling based upon the conditions in the Borough at the time. This section shall apply to off-duty court appearances and is not applicable to time spent in court during regular working hours. Police officers will request to use accrued compensatory time not less than three days in advance. 
The minimum time for court appearance will be two hours for an appearance at the local magistrate or a pre-trial conference and four hours for appearance at Common Pleas Court or any other court of record. Parking will be reimbursed for an appearance at Common Pleas Court or any other court ofrecord at a maximum rate of $20.00 when substantiated with a receipt. 
ARTICLE 18: UNIFORM ALLOWANCE 
The Employer shall provide each police officer with a $750.00 maximum annual uniform allowance. The Employer shall provide newly hired officers with their initial uniform set 
up. Newly hired officers will receive no uniform allowance for their first year of employment but receive $750.00 for each additional year of employment thereafter. 
Each police officer shall be reimbursed for the purchase of a non-uniform suit or suit jacket up to $75.00 per year. This amount shall be deducted from the above stated uniform allowances. 
Upon retirement after 25 years or more of service, the employee's sidearm will be presented and legally transferred to the employee. 
Newly hired police officers who do not complete probation will reimburse the borough for the cost of issued equipment and uniforms that cannot be utilized by other police officers. For example: custom fitted protective vests. 
ARTICLE 19: DAMAGE OR LOSS OF PERSONAL PROPERTY 
Police officers who suffer damage or loss of personal items in the line of official duty shall be compensated up to $100.00 per item with a maximum reimbursement of$300.00 per year. Proof of loss and a receipt for personal item replacement shall be provided by the 
officer for reimbursement. There shall be no duplication or recovery in the event other 
insurance provides coverage. 
ARTICLE 20: VEHICLES 
Police Department vehicles shall be provided with adequate equipment used in the 
performance ofpolice duties including lights, flares, radio gear, etc. 
The discretion and judgment ofthe Borough Council shall continue to prevail, except that 
allegations of unsafe conditions will be processed through the grievance procedure set 
forth herein. 
ARTICLE 21: BODY ARMOR 
If an officer currently does not have body armor, he may request it at the employer 
expense. Body armor will be replaced as required by the employer, when necessary, but 
when the replacement occurs, the replacement cost will not be charged against the police 
officer's uniform allowance. The Employer may require officers to wear such body armor. 
ARTICLE 22: SCHOOL OR PROGRAM ATTENDANCE 
In the event that any police officer is required by the Employer to attend any school or 
program outside oftheir normal work hours, the police officer shall be paid at the time and 
one-half rate their regular salary while in attendance at any such school or program· and 
they shall also be reimbursed for their travel expenses at the then current standard rate per 
mile as determined by the IRS for travel calculated from the Borough Building to the 
school or program. The Employer shall have the right to request reimbursement thereof 
from the appropriate goverrunental agency. 

ARTICLE 23: LAY-OFFS 
Lay-offs shall be made on the basis ofjob needs at the discretion ofthe Employer for just and proper cause. There shall be no lay-offs ofpolice officers for political or personal reasons. If a police officer ceases to work because of lay-off, all benefits under this agreement will terminate on the date ofthe police officer ceases to work; except that the police officer's Health Insurance Benefits will continue during such lay-off for a period of three months from the date the police officer ceases to work. 

ARTICLE 24: JUST CAUSE 
No police officer shall be disciplined, suspended, reprimanded, reduced in salary or 
compensation, or denied any personal advantage, without just cause. Any such action 
asserted by the Employer shall be subject to the grievance procedure contained in the 
agreement. 

ARTICLE 25: GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE 
It is the policy ofthe Employer to encourage a harmonious or cooperative relationship between its police officers and to resolve grievances in accordance with fair and orderly procedure. 
Definition: A grievance is a dispute concerning the interpretation, application, or alleged violation of a specific term or provision ofthe Agreement or past practices, or any oral or written agreement. 
Step One: A police officer with a grievance shall write a letter to the Chiefof Police, with copies to the mayor and the chairman ofthe Public Safety Committee within 15 days ofthe event or circumstance from which the grievance has arisen or is based or within 15 days of the day whenever the police officer knows ofsuch event or circumstance or should have known ofthe same, whichever is later. The Chief ofPolice shall attempt to resolve the grievance to the mutual satisfaction ofthe police officer and the borough within 5 calendar days ofits presentation. The Chief ofPolice shall report his/her decision to the police officer in writing. Ifthe police officer does not proceed with their grievance to the second step with the time limits prescribed in the following paragraph and no extension oftime is granted in writing, the grievance shall be considered to be satisfactorily resolved. 
Step Two: Ifthe Chief of Police for any reason should fail to resolve the grievance within 5 calendar days of its presentation, then ifthe police officer desired to proceed with the grievance to the third step, they shall, within 15 calendar days, file a written grievance with the President ofCouncil of the Borough of Carnegie, One Veterans Way, Carnegie, Pennsylvania 15106 by certified mail, return receipt requested, and shall request that the Council ofthe Borough of Carnegie consider a second step appeal. 
The Council ofthe Borough of Carnegie must, within thirty (30) calendar days after receiving the written appeal hold a hearing at which the police officer and/or police department may be present. The Council ofthe Borough of Carnegie, within 30 calendar days following the hearing, shall give the police officer a written decision. Ifthe police officer does not proceed with the grievance to the third step within the time limits prescribed in the following paragraph, and no extension oftime is granted, then the grievance is considered to be satisfactorily resolved. Ifthe Council of the Borough of Carnegie fails to hold the hearing within the time limits set forth above and render a decision within the time limits set above and no extension oftime is granted in writing, the grievance shall be considered to be satisfactorily resolved in favor ofthe grievant. 
Step Three: Ifthe grievant is not satisfied with the disposition of the grievance at the second step, the grievant may appeal to arbitration within 30 calendar days after receiving a decision at the second step. A request for arbitration may be initiated by the grievant serving upon the Employer a notice in writing of intent to proceed to arbitration. Upon receipt of a notice requesting arbitration, the parties shall meet to select an arbitrator or request a panel of3 prospective arbitrators from the American Arbitration Association in accordance with the requirements of Act III. The arbitrator shall have no power or authority to add to, subtract from or modify the provision ofan A ward or Agreement in arriving at a decision ofthe issue presented and shall confine his decision solely to the application and interpretation of an A ward, Agreement or Past Practice. The decision or A ward shall be final and binding. Each party shall bear the cost of preparing and presenting his own case and the costs and expenses for the neutral arbitrator shall be paid by the losing party. 
A grievance which affects a substantial number of employees may be initially presented by the police association at step 2 of the grievance procedure. 
A grievance may be withdrawn by the grievant at any time and the withdrawal ofany 
grievance shall not be prejudicial to the positions taken by the parties as they relate to that 
grievance or any future grievance. 
ARTICLE 26: MAINTENANCE OF MEMBERSHIP 
Upon incorporation of the Police Association, all police officers employed by the Borough of Carnegie who choose to maintain membership in the Police Association, will maintain their membership in good standing with the Association during the term of this Agreement and in accordance with the Constitution and Association's by laws. Any member not adhering to the Constitution or By Laws of the association will be subject to disciplinary action to be determined by the board of directors. 
, 
Executed on the first date written, intending to be legally bound hereby. 
BOROUGH OF CARNEGIE POLICE DEPARTMENT 
~~----­ ___ ! __t!/!3/Jd  
Sue Demko  date  ames F. Quattro  date  
Council President  Patrol Officer  


Stacie Riley Mayor 
Steve Beuter date Borough Manager 



