AGREEMENT
Between
BOROUGH OF CHURCIIlLL
And

THE BOROUGH OF CHURCHILL POLICEMEN

Duration:
January

1, 2019

through
December

31, 2022

TABLE OF CONTENTS

AGREEMENT.................................••...............................•.........•.....•
ARTICLE I - TCl'ID
..
ARTICIB II - Base Annual.Wage..........................................................
.
ARTICLE m-wngevity' Pay........
■■
■'
ARTICLEIV - J:nsman.ce
Bertefi:ts
........•................................•.•..............
A R T I C L E V - Sick wve ..
ARTICLEVI - Vaca.ti.on.
.....................................................................
.
ARTICLEVll - Holidays.....................................................................•
ARTICLE VIII- Unpaid Leave of Absence...............................................
.
ARTICLE IX -Uniform.Allowan.ce.........................•..................•...•........
ARTICLE
X - Sch.ooling.•....................••...........•..•••....••.........•.......
ARTICLE
X I - Bm-ea.vem.en.t
Leave..................................................
.
ARTICLE
XI I - Homs of Work; Scheduling andOvertime.................... ..
ARTICLE
X I I I - Off-Duty Court, ~Trial andMagistrateHearings......... .
ARTICLE XIV ..Pmsion.•......•......•.............•......••••.....................•••.....
ARTICLEXV - Voluntary Employee Benefit Association.............................
..
ARTICLEXVI - Grievan.ceProcedure.....................................................
.
ARTICLE XVII - Mandated Police Training ......... _-...................................
..
ARTICLEx.vm- Per'SOnn.el
Rec::,()MS
•......••••••••••••••••••••..•..•.•.••...•..••...•••••
ARTICLEXIX - Discussion Issues........................................................
.
ARTICLE XX - Residual.Rigb.ts.........••....•.............................•..•......•.....
ARTICLEXXI - B1llletp,roofVes'ts
......•..•.............................................•..•.
ARTICLE XXII - Publication of Policey and Procedures Manual..................... ..
ARTICLE XXIII - Employee Evaluation or PerformanceRecords...•.••••......••.•.••
ARTICLE.xxIV - S'tan.dBy Pay .....................•................•.•.......•....•....•.
A R T I C L E X X V - Officer-in-ChargePay ..........................................
.
A R T I C L E X X V I - Dues Decluction................••...•................•...............
Bookmarknot defined.
A R T I C L E X X V I I - RepresentativeRecognition.................................
.
A R T I C L E X X V I I I - Duration.....................................................
.
I

••••••

I

•••••••

I

••••••••••••

I

I

•••••••••••

I

I

I.

I ••••••••••••••••••

••••••••••••••

I

I

I ••

I I

I

••

I

I

••

•••••••••••

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

(i)

••••••••••••••

I

I

I ••

I

••

••••••••••••••

I

••••••

3
3
3

4
4
6
7
8
9

10
10
10
11
13
14
14
15
16
17
17
17
17

17
17
18
18
Error!
18
18

AGREEMENT
Tms AGREEMENT is entered into the3rd day of June, 2019, between the Borough of
Churchill (hereinafter "Borough"} and the Churchill Borough Policemen ( hereinafter "Officers"}.
WITNESSETH:

WHEREAS, the Borough and the Officers have bargained collectively in accordapce
withthetermsoftheActofJune24, 1968 , P.L. 237, No. 111, 43 P.S. 217.1 et seq.,
(hereinafter "Act111 "), and have arrived at a settlement oftheir differences:
NOW, THEREFORE

For and in consideration ofthe mutual covenants contained herein, and intending to be
legally bound hereby, the parties hereto do covenant and agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
Term
The term of this Agreement shall be for four (4) years from January 1, 2019, through
December31, 2022.
ARTICLE II
Base Annual Wage
A.
The base annual wage of each Officer with ten (10) full years of service shall be set as
follows:
Contract Year
2019
Base Annual Wage $88,762

2020
$90,981

2021
$93,255

2022
$95,587

All new Officers shall receive annual salary starting at fifty (500/4) percent of the Officer
base annual wage noted above. After the probationary period is satisfactorily completed by the
new Officer, they will receive annual anniversary increments of five percent (5%} ofthe Officer
base annual wage until they attain100% of the Officer base annual wage after ten (10) years of
continuous service. The borough reserves the right to adjust the starting officer salary up or down.
B.
The dollar differential between the rank of Lieutenant and Officer, who is at 100% of
base annual wage, shall be $900.00. The position of Lieutenant shall be filled at the sole
discretion ofthe Borough.
C.
For all purposes, including the calculation on seniority, the date the Officer actually
commenced work as an Officer for the Borough shall be used for determining length of service
and/or anniversary date.

3

ARTICLE Ill
Longevity Pay
In addition to the base annual wage, each Officer shall be eligible to receive longevity pay
of $60.00 per year commencing after the eighth (8) year of service and capping at twenty-five
(25) years of service.

ARTICLE IV
Insurance Benefits
A.
All eligibility and benefits shall be in accordance with the provisions of the insurance
policies provided by the Borough. The Borough shall retain the right to select insurance
carrier(s) for any of the following insurance benefits, subject to the requirements contained in
Section IV(C)(5) applicable for Medical Insurance only.
B.

Life Insurance

1.
The Borough shall also provide $10,000 in-group term life insurance for each
eligible Officer increasing to $20,000 after six (6) months of service and to $50,000 after eight
(8) years of service.
2.
At retirement, the Borough shall provide each Officer with a paid-up (or pre-paid)
life insurance policy in the amount of Ten Thousand ($10,000.00) Dollars.
C.

Medical Insurance

1.
The plan for Officers and immediate families shall be UPMC Small Business
Advantage Bronze EPO - $7000/14000 Plan, as it may be amended by the carrier... Included in
the provisions of the Plan, all Officers are agreeing to pay a set annual deductible of $250 � a
single employee and $500 for other than single as well as the specified co-payments as outlined
in the plan.
Additionally, each Officer shall pay a portion of the total premium obligation for that
Officer and the Officer's family members if the family members are covered under the policy,
according to the following schedule:
2019- 5%
2020-6%
2021-7%
2022 -8%
Any such required payment will be deducted from the Officer's regular bi-monthly pay.
2.
The-Borough shall reimburse Officers for co-pays (excluding prescriptions) after
deductibles have been met.

4

3.

Officers shall be responsiblefor 100% of out-of-networkcosts not covered by the

Plan.

4.
An Officer who elects to obtam medical insurancecoverage through an insurance
plan available to the Officer's spouse as opposed to the Plan shall be paid a stipendfor
$100/month.
5.
The Borough may, in order to reducecosts or cost increases, change plans and/or
carriers to "substantially comparable" coverage. "Substantially comparable" coverage in this
Agreement does not mean equal or equivalent The Police, however, retain the right to grieve
the Borough's determinationthat a plan and/or carrier are "substantiallycomparable". When the
Borough decidesto change the plan or carrier, it will provide the Police with details (Swnmary
of Benefits)of the current plan and the new "substantiallycomparable"plan. If the Police do not
agree that the plan or carrier selected by the Borough is "substantiallycomparable", they will so
state, in writing, to the Borough within ten {10) calendar days of receiving the plan and/or the
provider and plan being presentedto the Police by the Borough or such longer period as mutually
agreed to by the parties in writing, identifying the reasons. In·that event, the Borough may not
unilaterally implement the proposed new plan and/or carrier provided; however, it may
immediatelyprocess the dispute before a neutral arbitrator selected pursuant to the arbitration
step of the grievance procedure. The decision of the arbitrator on this "substantially
comparable"issue shall be issued within forty-five(45) calendar days of the Police Department's
written notice contestingthat the plan selected by the Borough is "substantiallycomparable" and
shall be final and binding and will determineif the Borough is authorizedto implement the new
plan or provider.

D.

Dental Insurance

The Borough shall provide high option dental insurance for all Officers and their
immediatefamilies,if so elected.
E.

Villon Insurance

The Borough shall provide vision insurancecoveragefor all Officers and their immediate
families, if so elected.
F.

Fabe ArrestInsurance

The Borough shall provide each Officer with false arrest insurance coverage as provided
in 2008, which includes coverage for false arrest, detention, imprisonment or malicious
prosecution.
G.

Acddent and Sldme11Insurance

1.
The Borough shall provide each Officer with accident and sick benefits to a total
payment of Three Hundred Fifty ($350.00) Dollars per week. Eligibility shall commence after
the accumulated sick leave and vacation have been exhausted but no earlier than the

s

ninety-first (91 st) calendar day after the onset of disability.

2.
Any Officer who does not have sufficient accumulated sick leave to cover him
through the first ninety-one (91) days of disabilityshall be paid asfollows:
a.

From the date of disabilitythe officer must use all sick leave (annual and
accumulated),vacations and holidays;

b.

Commencingthe sixty-first(61st) day afterthe onset of illness or disability
through the ninetieth (90th) calendar day, the officer shall be paid by the
Borough at the rate of insmance coverage for any of the days not so
coveredby sick leave allowances.

c.

Commencing the ninety-first (91st) day after the onset of illness or
disability, the Officer shall receive the accident and sickness
insurance benefit for the duration of the illness or disability up to
a maximumof twelve (12) months.

ARTICLEV
Siclu,n,e
A
It is understood by the Borough and the Officers that sick leave is a benefit earned by
service and is availablewhen and if needed and shall not be a "right of taking," such asvacation.
Abuse of sick leave shallbe grounds for discipline.
B.
The Borough may require an Officer to submit a doctor's certificate attesting to the
Officer's fitness to return to work if the Officer has been absent more than three (3) consecutive
work days. The Borough shall pay for a doctor's exam if it desiresan opinion other than that of
the treating physiciansor if the Officerhas not seen a physician during the Officer's absence.
C.
Salaries shallbe continued during disabilitydue to illness for a maximumnumber of days
specifiedherein, providedthe fact of illness is satisfactorilyestablishedand that prompt notice of
the circumstances has been given {as defined in the Standard Operating Procedures of the
Borough of Churchill Police Department). During each calendar year of this contract, each
Officer will accrue one sick day after every five weeks of employmentwith the Borough up to a
maximum of 10 days for that year minus days used that year. Each Officer can accumulate a
maximumof 100unused sick days, which may be carried over from year to year.
D.
All Officers shall notify thepolice desk as soon as possible after they know that they will
not be able to work their scheduledshift as a result of an injury or illness.
E.
At the time of retirement, each Officer eligible for retirement under the existingBorough
Pension Plan rules shall have the right to sell back to the Borough any unused sick days at a rate
of 20% of his/her per diem at that time, up to the maximum accumulationof 100 days, with a
maximumpayment of $2,000.

6

F.
The periods of sick leave salary continuance may be increased when approved by
Borough Council.
G.
An Officermay use up to ten (10) days of sick leave per year concurrentwith Family and
Medical Leave Act (''FMLA'') leave for any day that qualifiesfor FMLA.

ARTICLE
VI
Vacation
A.
All Officersshall accruethe followingnumber of vacation days at the start of each
calendar year as noted in the table below. The maximum number of vacation days that any
Officer can accrue in a given calendar year is 26 days. Upon each Officer's anniversary date
after the January 1st allocation of vacation days, they will be entitled to any additional days
earnedper the table below fur the remainderof that year.

Vacation
Entitlement

Length of Service
From Six months to less than one (1) Year

One day for each month worked up
to a maximumof ten (10) days
10 days
15 days
16 days
17 days
18 days
19 days
20 days
21 days
22 days
23 days
24 days
25 days
26days

After one (1) full year of service
After five (5) full years of service
After nine (9) full years of service
After ten (10) full years of service
After eleven (11) full years of service
After twelve (12) full years of service
After thirteen (13) full years of service
After fourteen (14) full years of service
After :fifteen(15) full years of service
After sixteen (16) full years of service
After seventeen(17) full years of service
Aftereighteen (18) full years of service
After nineteen (19) full years of service

B.
Subject to vacation allocations noted in Section A above, each Officer shall be
entitled to take at least one (1) week of his vacation between the first full week which
commencesafter June 15th through the end of the week in which Labor Day occurs. This shall
be called the summer vacation period. Any other time shall be called non-summer vacation
period.
C.
On or befureDecember
1• of eachyear,eachOfficershallbe givmtheopportunity of selecting
his vacation time from a scheduleto be circulatedby seniority.Each Officer shallhave three (3)
days in which to pick his choice of one week's vacation (either summer or non-summer)
by seniority and transmit the vacation scheduleto the officer next in line, who will have three (3)

7

days after receiving it to select his vacation and transmit the list to the officer next in line. After
each Officer has so picked his first week's vacation, the schedulewill then be re-circulated in the
same manner by seniority so that each Officer may then select the remaining weeks of his
vacation.
D.
After the vacationlist has been circulatedthrough the rank and file the second time, andif
there are any remaining "summer" weeks, they will be allocated using the rotation system
according to the seniority list starting with the most senior Officer and going through the rank
and file by seniority list. The next time vacations are selected and any summer weeks are
available, the selection will begin with the next Officer down on the seniority list where the list
left off the last time. Any vacation week openedup by an Officer switchingto an available week,
will be distributed in the same manner as indicated above. Bach seniority list will be kept
separatefrom the other.
E.
After the vacation selection process is completed,within a reasonable period of time, the
vacation schedule for the next calendar year shall be prepared and posted. The schedule will
show the namesof the Officers andthe dates selected.
F.

The Chief of Police shall select his vacationtime independentof the other Officers.

The Borough shall have the right to limit the number of Officers actually on vacation
based upon the operational and efficiency needs of providing police protection for the
community,but the Borough shall not act unreasonable in this regard. Vacations shall not be
changed, except in emergency. Vacations shall not be cumulative; however, if the
Borough causes any Officer to lose his vacation, the Borough shall, at its option but after
consultationwith the Officer, either pay the Officer for time so lost or permit the Officer to take
a commensurate·amountof the time off with pay the following calendar year when it is possible
to coordinate such vacation with the Chief of Police and that year's vacation selection.
Carryovervacation cannot affect the subsequentyear's vacation selectionprocess.
G.

H.
In no instancecanvacationallowances
be carried over or accumulated from one calendar
year to the next, except as provided for in Section G above.

Vacations should be scheduled to run consecutively,where possible. Approval to split
vacation into nonconsecutiveweeks or days must be obtained from the Chief of Police.
I.

1.
At the time of termination of employment, any Officer who has unused vacation days
accruedfrom that calendar year shall be paid for those unused vacation days at the straight time
rate.
ARTICLE
VII
Holidays

A.

The followingdays are recognized as paid holidays:
1.

New Years Day

8

2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

MemorialDay
IndependenceDay
Labor Day
ThanksgivingDay
ChristmasDay

Officers shall not get any of the aforesaid days off (except to the extent that they
fall on a given Officer's pass day) but shall instead be paid an extra day's pay at straight.time
rates for each of the aforesaidholidays, provided they do not work that holiday. Officers shall be
paid one and one-half (1 and 1/2) times the Officer's regular hourly rate for hours actually
worked on a holiday. For purposes of scheduling and compensation,Christmas Day and New
Year's Day will be deemedto begin at 3:00 p.m. on the holiday eve and continue throughout the
calendarholiday.
B.
In addition to the recognized holiday pay, Officers can earn floating holidays as noted in
the table below. The maximum number of floating holidays that any Officer can accrue in a
given calendar year is 8 days. Upon each Officer's anniversary date after the January 1•
allocation of floating holidays, they will be entitled to any additional days earned per the
schedulebelow for the remainder of that year.

FloatingHoliday
Entitlement
4 days (no cost)
6 days (4 at no cost)
8 days (4 at no cost)

Length of Service
After six (6) months of service

After four (4) full years of service
After five (S) full years of service

The Officermayschedule his floatingholiday, which will be granted with the approval of
the Borough, if it does not affect the operation of the police department. The first four (4)
floatingholidays earnedafter six months must be taken at no cost to the Borough.
Each year, all Officers shall be allowed to sell back their allocated floating
holidays up to a maximum of four (4) reimbursedat that officer's time and one half rate.
C.
Each Officer shallget their respectivebirthday off, credited as time off only. If an officer
is already scheduledoff on his birth date, or due to manpowerrequirements is requiredto work,
a compensatoryday shall be credited and scheduled by mutual agreement between that officer
and the Chief of Police.

ARTICLE
VIII
Unpaid Leave of Absence
A.
At the sole discretion of Borough Council, an officer, upon written request, may be
granted a leave of absencewithout pay for a period not to exceed thirty (30) calendar days. Upon
written request of the Officer, and in the sole discretion of the Borough Council, such leave of
absencemay be renewed for another thirty (30) calendarday period.

9

B.
Officers on leave of absence under this Article shall not lose their seniority rights;
but an Officer who, while on leave of absence, engages in other employment without
the approvalof the Borough Council, or who fails to report for work on or before the expiration
of the Officer'sleave of absence,will be consideredas having quit without notice and will forfeit
seniorityrights.
ARTICLE
IX
Uniform Allowance

A.
An annualallowancefor uniforms and cleaning shall be maintainedon a voucher system
through the Borough office for each calendar year. Except for emergencies,vouchers shall be
submittedto the Borough for approveduniform items on a quarterlybasis for payment by the
Borough.
UniformAllowance shall be set as follows:
2019 - $850.00
2020 - $900.00
2021 - $900.00
2022 - $900.00
Any unused uniform allowanceshall be returned to the Boroughat the end of each year.
B.

Uniformsshall be in accordancewith prescribedregulations.
ARTICLE
X
Schooling

Officers will be paid their regular hourly rate of pay for hours spent attending police
schools, training sessions, meetings and Flefflinsf!II,
providing the police school training sessions,
meetings and seminars have been recommended by the Chief of Police and approved by the
Mayorprior to the officer startingthem.
ARTICLE
XI
Berell'Pement
Leave

A.
There shall be no deduction from pay for the following absences, and days of such
absencesin any week shall be counted as days worked for the purpose of determining eligibility
for overtimepremium:

10

Death in the immediate family, spouse, parent, parent of spouse, children,
brother, or sister, and any near relative pennanently residing in the same household as the
Officer. Such absence, however, to be so effective shall not exceed five (5) days and must be
reported at be.ginningof absence;
1.

2.
Death of an Officer's grandmotheror grandfather,the officer will be granted the
day of the funeraloff assumingit is reportedprior to the absence.

3.

When Bll Officer is excused from work by the Chief of Police for the day of the

funeral.
B.

There shallbe an appropriatedeductionfrom pay for any absence not listed above.

C.

Pass days shall not be a part of bereavementleave.
ARTICLE
XII
Hours of Work,Schedulingand Overtbne

A.

Hours ofWork

1.
The noonal workday shall be eight (8) hours of work in a twenty-fom (24)-hour
period. Normal daily work shifts shall be 7:00 AM to 3:00 PM, 3:00 PM to 11:00 PM and11:00
PM to 7:00 AM. The work day shall begin at 7:00 AM and shall end at 7:00 AM the next day.
The 1st shift shall be from 7:00 AM to 3:00 PM. With mutual consent of the Officer, a 7:00 PM
to 3:00 AM and/or a 11:00 AM to 7:00 PM shift may be added by the Chief of Police when
deemed necessary to maintain mfoimnm safe police coverage for the Borough of Churchill
citizens andemployees. The normalworkweekshall consist of five (5) consecutiveworkdaysand
two (2) consecutivepass days. The workweekshall commenceat 7:00 AM on Sunday.
2.
In the event of an emergency, it may be necessary to deviate from this schedule
for a temporaryperiod.
3.
Each Officer shall be entitled to one (1) thirty (30) minute lunch period and two
(2) fifteen (15) minute coffee breaks during each eight (8) hour shift. The lunch period and
coffee breaks shall not be taken when normal, unusual or emergency duties require
immediateattention.
B.

Scheduling

1.
The Borough shall scheduleOfficers and establish work shifts. The scheduleshall
be establishedand posted not more frequentlythan monthly and shall be posted at least two (2)
weeks prior to its effective date but may be changed after posting if there is an unusual change in
the number of Officers in the community.Officers of all ranks shall have the right to select their

11

work schedule according to seniorityby signing the posted schedule. In the event of vacancy, the
schedulewill be re-bid on a senioritybasis.
2.
After work schedules are selected, the schedule shall not be changed for the
period of time it is in effect, except in cases of necessity. This shall not excuse an Officer from
working overtime as provided herein. Barring those changes necessitated by necessity and/or
any emergency,it is the intent of this agreement that each Officer shall have twelve (12) hours
between shifts hereinafter called "shortrest" before being required to commence another shift.
This is to include the "knock-out"Officer, as defined in section 4 below. Officers will be paid
two hours additionalpay at straighttime when they are required to work with "short rest".

3.

Officers, by mutual consent with the Chief of Police or Officer in Charge, may
work "short rest" at no cost to the Borough. Officers, by mutual consent, may change shifts
and/or turns with one another for personal reasons, subject to the Borough's prior approval,
which approval shall not unreasonablybe withheld. However,the Officer on the posted schedule
shall remain responsiblefor coverageof the shift and/or tum and such a change shal1not result in
any overtimeliability.
4.
An Officer working "knock-out" is one who is assigned or working nonscheduled or non-regular shift(s). The Officer on the "knock-out"schedule shall be available at
the Borough's request to work special details, fill in for and work the shift and/or tum of an
Officer on vacation, floating holiday, sick leave, leave of absence, bereavement leave,
suspension or absence for any other reason. It is specificallyunderstood that Officers working
"knock-out" shall work when and as directed and will be entitled to short rest pay or two fixed
pass days. However,where possible, the Borough will attempt to scheduletwo consecutive pass
days for Officers working"knock-out".
5.
Officers not working the "knock-out" shift may submit requests to the Chief of
Police to work shift(s) that would normally be assigned to the "knock-out'' officer. All such
requestsmust,be made Mondayprior to the posting of the schedule.Any shiftchangemust be made
at no cost to the Borough. The Chief of Police shall determine if such a request can be
accommodated.If more than one Officerrequests the same day(s), it will be the duty of the Chief
of Police to see that such change(s) are distributed in a fair and equitablemanner.
6.
Officers him! after January 1, 1993 are also subject to sclledule changes
acoommodate
courtappearancesat nocost to the Borough.

to

7.
The Borough reserves the right to change the type of schedule, but agrees that it
will meet and discuss with the Officers all such proposed changesto the schedule before they are
put into effect and will attempt to accommodateall reasonablerequest made by the officers.
8.
The School Safety/ResourceOfficer(s) will be scheduledby the Chief of Police,
which shall be coordinated with the Woodland Hills School District to accommodate the
availabilityof the officer for dutie$at the High School.

12

C.

Overtime

1.
Overtime shall be at the rate of time and one-half (1 and ½) the Officer's hourly
rate, excluding all premiumsexceptexcess of eight (8) hours in any workday or forty (40) hours
in any workweek. There shall be no pyramiding of overtime. Overtime must be worked when
scheduled as the Borough deems necessary,but where practicable,the Borough shall give at least
twenty-fom (24) hours notice of scheduled overtime, providing the Officer originally scheduled
to work the overtime is credited with having worked it for the purposes of rotating scheduled
overtime.
2.
Any Officer working on the job during the regular working hours on a day
when unscheduled overtime on the job is necessary, shall continue to work the unscheduled
overtime hours. Scheduled overtime shall be rotated among the Officers in a fair and equitable
manner. Officers are obligated to work scheduled overtime as scheduled. The Borough shall
readjust scheduled overtime each calendar quarter.
D.
This Article shall not be deemed to affect the Employer's right, at its sole ·discretion to
divide the months and weeks into appropriatepay periods for payroll purposes.
E.
No hours paid under the Article pertaining to off-duty Court, Pre-Trial and Magistrate
Hearings shall qualify as hours worked for overtime purposes.
F.
Shift Differential. Any Officer who works between the hours of 3:00 PM-7:00 AM shall
be compensated by receiving an additional $0.50 per hour. The School Resource Officers are
excluded from this benefit and are considered the Daylight shift even though their shift
commencesat 0630 hours.
ARTICLE
XIII
Off-Duty Court,Pre-Trial and MagistrateHearings
A.
If an Officer is required or requested to appear in Court or for pre-trial procedures or
conferencesor a Magistrate'shearing during off-duty on any case arising as a result of his duties
as a police officer of the Borough, the Officer shall be paid as follows for each call out with the
exception of Officers hired after January 1•, 1993 that are subject to scheduling changes to
accommodatecourt appearancesat no cost to the Borough.
1.

Common Pleas and Federal Court appearance (excluding Summsry Appeal
Hearings):eight (8) hours at straighttime.

2.

Pre-Trial preparation and Smnmary Appeal Hearing(s) in Pittsburgh: four (4)
hours at straight time.

3.

MagistrateHearings: Two (2) hours at time andone half.

4.

Juvenile Court: Four (4) hours at straight time and any hours over four (4) at
straighttime.

13

5.

The Chief of Police will develop the policies regarding off duty court appearances
for civil cases.

6.

Pay for magistrate hearings will be on appearance, as opposed to a case basis.

7.

Officers called to testify at school expulsion and administrative proceedings
during off duty hours shall be granted II minimum of two (2) hours pay at the rate
of time and one-half.

8.

Officers called to testify at mental health hearings during off duty hours shall be
granted a rninirn1UD. of two (2) hours pay at the rate of time and one-half.

B.
Officers shall retain witness fees and mileage fees as reimbursement for expenses and
shall not be entitled for any other reimbursement from the Borough for gasoline,
parking, meals or other miscellaneous expenses.
ARTICLE XIV
Pension

The Borough provides a pension benefit for each Officer as outlined in Article II of the Churchill
Borough Code Book, as amended from time to time by Borough Ordinance, the provisions of
which comply with Act 600, as amended, and which the following specific provisions have
been contractually agreed to as part of this Agreement.
A.
The Social Security offset applicable to the pension benefits of each police officer shall
remain zero {0%) percent.
B.

Actuarial studies shall be performed no less than biennially, to be paid by the plan.

C.
The sole right to set the member pension contribution rate on an annual basis as of
January 1 • of each year, as provided by statute, remains with the Pension Board as selected by
the Borough of Churchill. Contn'butions will be determined by the MMO, after al l state aid units
designated as uniformed police units to fund the MMO are credited to the police pension.
D.
The service increment shall be increase4 after 25 years of service from $50 to $100. The
maximum increment shall not exceed $100 regardless of length of service.
AR T ICLE XV
Voluntary Employee Benefit Association

The Borough shall maintain and manage a Voluntary Employee Beneficiary Association {VEBA)
plan for the benefit of the Officers. On a ".oluntary basis, each Officer can enroll in this plan. In
order to enroll, the Officer must pay $2,000 into the plan prior to retirement. The plan will pay
14

$250.00per month towardsmedical insurancecoverage to any Officerwho retires prior to the age
of 65. The payment will be made until such time as the Officer becomes Medicare eligible or
until the Officer reachedthe age of 65, whicheveroccurs first.
ARTICLE
XJ/1
GrievanceProcedure

A.
The purpose of this procedure is to secure at the lowest possible level equitable solutions
to the problems which may from time to time arise affecting the terms and conditions of the
employmentof Officers. Both parties agree the conditions of the proceedings will be kept as
informal and confidentialas may be appi:opriateat any level of the procedure.
B.
A "grievance" shall mean any dispute between any Officer and any level of-Borough
management regarding the terms and conditions of employment, as defined and.
interpretedundertheActofJune24,
1968,P.L. 237No. lll,43 P.S. 5217.1 et seq. (Act 111)
and not restricted by the Residual Rights Article of this agreement It is understood that should
binding arbitrationbe required by statute for grievances and that if the grievancesprocedure is in
the future modified to provide for a final and binding award by a neutral third party arbitrator,
that a grievance will be defined as: A dispute concerning the interpretation, application or
allegedviolation of a specificterm or provision of this agreement.
C.
Grievancesmay be processedby one or more individual Officers,any duly authorized
representatives, and/or any combinationof the aforesaid Officers and/or representatives, at any
stage of the procedure. References to "Officer" in this Article shall be deemed to include his
representative.
D.
First Level - Any Officer who has a grievance which he wishes to have resolved shall,
within ten (10) calendar days of the occurrence of the alleged grievance, set forth the details of
the grievancein writingand submitit to the Chief of Police, who shall discuss the grievancewith
the Officer and attemptto resolve it.
E.
Second Level - If a grievanceis not resolved within ten (10) days at the first level to the
Officer's satisfaction,he may submit the written grievance to the Mayor, who shall meet and
discuss the grievancewith the Officer and the Chief of Police, and attemptto resolve it.
F.
Third Level - If a grievance is not resolved within ten (10) days at the Second Level to
the Officer's satisfaction, he may submit the written grievance to the Police Committee of
Borough Council, which Committee shall meet and discuss the grievance with the Officer, and
the Chief of Police, and the Mayor attemptto resolve it.
G.
Fourth Level - In the event the grievance is not satisfactorilyresolved before the Police
Committee,the birrgainjngunit representativemay initiate an appeal by serving upon the head of
the political subdivisionsa notice in writing of his intent to proceed to arbitration within 10 days
after the receipt of the denial by the Police Committee or after the date the decision is due.

15

The arbitrator is to be selected by the parties jointly within 10 days after the notice has been
given. If the parties fail to agree on an arbitrator, either party may request the Pennsylvania
Bureau of Mediationto submit a list of arbitrators from which one shall be chosen.
The arbitrator shall neither add to, subtract from, nor modify the provisionsof this agreement, or
of any other arbitration awards. The arbitrator shall confine him or herself to the precise issues
submitted for arbitration. The arbitrator has no authority to determine any other issues not
submittedto him or her.
The decision of the arbitration shall be final and binding on both parties. The arbitrator shall be
requestedto issue his decision within 30 days after the hearing.
All of the time limits contained in this article may be extended by mutual agreement. If the
employer fails to respond in a timely manner in any step of the grievance procedure, the
grievanceis automaticallyresolved in favor of the grievant.
All fees and expenses of the arbitrator shall be divided equally between the parties. Each party
shall bear the cost of preparing and presenting its own case.
An aggrievedmember and ba:rgaioiogunit representativeand a reasonablenumber of witnesses
shall be grantedreasonable time during working hours to process grievances in accordance with

this sectionwithout loss of pay or leave time.
The bargaining umt must receive notice of any grievance filed and must have an opportunity to
appearwith the grievant at all steps of the grievanceprocedure.

H.
Utilization of the aforesaid grievance procedure shall not be deemed to preclude any
Officer from subsequently pursuing any and all statutory, legal, and/or equitable privileges,
rights and remedies which would be availableto him or her if this grievanceprocedure were not
in effect. However, any Officer who exercises any such statutoryor other independentprivilege,
right or grievanceprocedurewaives the rights set forth in this Article.
I.

Participationin the aforesaidgrievanceprocedure by the Borough shall not be deemed to

preclude Borough Council from availingitself of any statutory,legal, and/or equitable privileges,

rights, and/or remedies as would be availableto it if the grievanceprocedurewere not in effect.

AR TICLB XVII
Mandated Polic~ Training
If an Officer can be scheduled during normal duty time to attend mandatory police
training imposed by state or Borough regulation, then there shall be no overtime paid for
attendance at such mandatory training. The Officers will have reasonable flexibility. Any
training outside of the posted work schedulewill be at time and one-half.

16

ARTICLE
XVIII
Personnsl Records

Whenever any addition is made to the official personnel records of the Borough
involving an Officer, the Officer involved shall be notified and given a copy of the item, which
has been added to the file.
ARTICLE
XIX
Discussion Issues

The Officers acknowledgethe Borough'sright to designateuniforms and equipment. The
Borough agrees to meet with and discuss areas of concern relating to these matters with the
Officers. Each side shall select three (3) representatives to discuss these items at mutually
agreeabletimes.
ARTICLE
XX
Residual Rights

All additional allowances,benefits and working conditions in effect December 31, 1992
will be continued, except provisions contained herein. Other conditionsof employment shall be
as coveredby the Rules and Regulationsof the Civil ServiceCommission.
ARTICLE
XXI
BuUetproo/ Vests

The Borough agrees to fund bulletproof vests requiredas part of the uniform.
ARTICLE
XXII
PubUcatlon Of Polley And Procedures Manual

It is agreed that the Officers have the right to review and oommentupon any policy and
proceduremanual developedand adopted by Borough Council.
ARTICLE
XXIII
Employee Evaludon or Performance Records

When and if a formal evaluationprocedure is instituted, the Officers shall have the right
to review their evaluation.

17

ARTICLE
XXIV
Stand-ByPay

The Borough agrees to pay time and one half if any Officer is called for stand-by
assignment. Officers will be paid for actual hours spent on stand-by.
ARTICLE
XXV
Officer-In-ChargePay

The senior Officer on duty, in the absence of the Chief of Police or ranking Officer, shall
be the Officer-In-Chargeand will be compensated at $0.95 per hour above their normal rate of
pay.
ARTICLE
XXVI
Dues Deduction

The employer is required to deduct the cum:nt dues andassessment from compensation
received by members of the police association. The dues andassessments shall be deducted at
the rate of 1112thof the total assessment from each member's paycheck on the last pay of each
month and shall be forwarded to the treasurer of the bargaining unit representing the police
department. Dues to be deducted from each Officer on a voluntarybasis.
ARTICLE
XXVII
RepresentativeRecognitUJn

The Borough recognizes the Churchill Police Association as a bargajnjng agent and the
representativeof the Police Departmentof Churchill Borough.
ARTICLE
XXVIII
Duration

Pursuant to the requirementsof Act 111, this agreement shall be binding upon the parties
hereto, their successorsand assigns, from January 1, 2019 to and including December 31, 2022,
and thereafter from year to year
except that either party may notify the other maccordance with
Act 111 of its desire to modify or terminate this Agreement. The parties hereto will meet and
proceed after receipt of such notice in accordancewith Act 111.

TADMS:5152257-6

02193!1-160786

18

IN WITNESSWHEREOF,the parties hereto having negotiated,understood and read the
foregoin& being duly authorized to bind the party they represent and intending to be legally
bound herebyhave hereunto set their hands, and seals this 3rd day of June, 2019.
CHURCHILLPOLICEASSOCIATION

BOROUGHOF CHURCHILL

TADMS:5152257-1
028939-160786

19

