Collective Bargaining Agreement
By and Between

Teamsters Local Union No. 205
Representing

Pleasant Hills Police Department
And

The Borough of Pleasant Hills
January 1, 2021 through December 31, 2025

Table of Contents
Article No. 1

Previous Awards, Agreements and Past Practices

1

Article No. 2

Term of Agreement

1

Article No. 3

Wages

2

Article No. 4

Work Schedules

2

Article No. 5

Holidays

3

Article No. 6

Overtime

3

Article No. 7

Officer in Charge

4

Article No. 8

Longevity

4

Article No. 9

Mileage Rate

4

Article No. 10

Meal Money

5

Article No. 11

Uniform and Cleaning Maintenance Allowance

5

Article No. 12

Vacations

5

Article No. 13

Personal Days

6

Article No. 14

Bereavement

6

Article No. 15

Sick Leave

7

Article No. 16

Medical Insurance Coverage

7

Article No. 17

Disability Benefits

8

Article No. 18

Life Insurance, Accidental Death and Dismemberment

9

Article No. 19

Pension Contributions

10

Article No. 20

Pension Board

10

Article No. 21

Pension Benefits

10

Article No. 22

Grievance Procedure

12

Article No. 23

Residency

13

Article No. 24

Maintenance of Membership

13

Article No. 25

Officer Rights

13

Article No. 26

Canine Provisions

13

Article No. 27

Severability

14

AGREEMENT

This Agreement by and between the BOROUGH OF PLEASANT HILLS, a municipal
corporation located in Allegheny County, Pennsylvania hereinafter referred to as "Borough"
AND

TEAMSTERS, LOCAL 205 of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, Allegheny County,
Pennsylvania, hereinafter referred to as "Police."

WITNESSETH
WHEREAS, the various Acts of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania provide for the
negotiation and arbitration of wages, conditions of employment, benefits and other matters
pertaining to working conditions of the members of its Police Force; and
WHEREAS, the members of the Pleasant Hills Police Department have entered into discussions
with the Pleasant Hills Borough Council concerning salary, benefits and working conditions; and
WHEREAS, the parties hereto desire to reduce their understandings and agreements to a written
document.
NOW, THEREFORE, the parties to this Agreement, intending to be legally bound, agree as
follows:

1.

PREVIOUS AW ARDS, AGREEMENTS AND PAST PRACTICES

All prior interest arbitration awards and written collective bargaining agreements have been
integrated into this agreement. This clause shall not be construed to prevent the Borough from
managing the operations of the Police Department in a manner not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Agreement.
2.

TERM OF AGREEMENT

The term of this Agreement shall be five (5) years from 12:01 a.m. January 1, 2021 until 12:00
midnight December 31, 2025.

1

WAGES

3.

The wages during the term of this Agreement shall be as follows:
Service
Completed
with
the Borough

(3.0%)

(2.75%)

(3.0%)

(2.75%)

(3.0%)

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

Lieutenant

$107,436.21

$110,390.71

$113,702.43

$116,829.24

$120,334.12

Sergeant

$104,573.89

$107,449.67

$110,673.16

$113,716.67

$117,128.17

Patrolman A

5 years

$99,594.18

$102,333.02

$105,403.01

$108,301.59

$111,550.64

PatrolmanB
(90% of A)

4 years, 6
months

$89,634.76

$92,099.72

$94,862.71

$97,471.43

$100,395.58

Patrolman C
(85% of A)

3 years, 9
months

$84,655.05

$86,983.07

$89,592.56

$92,056.35

$94,818.05

Patrolman C-2
(80% of A)

3 years

$79,675.35

$81,866.42

$84,322.41

$86,641.27

$89,240.51

Patrolman D-1
(75% of A)

2 years, 3
months

$74,695.64

$76,749.77

$79,052.26

$81,226. 19

$83,662.98

Patrolman D-2
(70% of A)

1 year, 6
months

$69,715.93

$71,633.11

$73,782.11

$75,811. 11

$78,085.45

Patrolman E-1
(65% of A)

9 months

$64,736.22

$66,516.46

$68,511.96

$70,396.03

$72,507.92

Patrolman E-2
(60% of A)

Less than 9
months

$59,756.51

$61,399.81

$63,241.81

$64,980. 95

$66,930.39

Sergeant rate to be set at 5% above Patrolman grade A.
The hourly rate each year shall be determined by dividing the annual salary by 2080.
Effective January 1, 2017, officers will be paid every two weeks.

4.

WORK SCHEDULES

The parties shall continue to follow the current practice regarding work schedules for the
duration of this collective bargaining agreement.
2

5.

HOLIDAYS

Each Officer shall receive thirteen (13) paid holidays per year, as follows:
1/1 New Year's Day
+ President's Day
3/17 St. Patrick's Day
+ Good Friday
+ Easter

+ Memorial Day
6/14 Flag Day
7/4 Fourth of July
8/14 V.J. Day
+ Labor Day

+ Columbus Day
+ Thanksgiving Day
12/25

Christmas

(+ Actual dates for these holidays change each year.)
Any Police Officer who works on any of the above-designated holidays will be compensated
at the rate of two and one-half (2-1/2) times his daily rate of pay. Holiday pay will be paid
to any officer whose eight (8) hour tour of duty ends on a holiday.
6.

OVERTIME

A. The regular rate of pay as the term is used in this paragraph shall mean the hourly rate
which the Police Officer would have received for the work if it had been performed
during non-overtime hours, including longevity divided by 2,080.
B. For overtime calculation purposes the workweek shall consist of seven (7) consecutive
calendar days beginning at 7:00 am. on Sunday.
C. Overtime at the rate of one and one-half times the hourly rate of pay shall be paid for all
hours worked in excess of forty (40) hours in a workweek.
D. Hours compensated for at overtime rates shall not be counted further for any purpose in
determining overtime liability under the same or any other provisions of this Agreement.
E. Time worked shall be included in the determination of hours worked. Time worked shall
include paid time off such as sick leave or vacation leave and all court time, magistrate
time, time in attendance at training meetings required by the Borough, and unworked
holidays.
F. Police Officers called back to work for any purpose including court or magistrate
appearances after completing their normal eight (8) hour workday within any twenty-four
(24) hour period or after completing forty (40) straight time hours within one week shall be
guaranteed a minimum of three (3) hours work at the applicable rate of pay. (One (1)hour
minimum at the beginning of a scheduled shift).
1.

When a court appearance, attendance at a magistrate's hearing or training does not
occur during the course of a duty assignment, it shall be considered a call-out. In the
event of a court appearance, a Police Officer shall receive the three (3) hour
guarantee or the actual time spent, including travel time, whichever is greater.
3

2. If the above-cited hours in Subsection 1 would be in excess of the Police Officer's
scheduled eight (8) hours in one day or forty (40) hours in one week, the officer
shall be paid at the overtime rate.
3. The Borough shall not be required to pay a Police Officer for an appearance in court
involving a civil case unless he is subpoenaed by the Borough as a witness or is a
defendant as a result of his having acted within the scope of his employment.
4. Overtime opportunities which are known to the Borough in advance and paid details
shall be distributed as equally as possible among the unit Police Officers. The
Borough shall normally assign such overtime opportunities and paid details from a
list of those Police Officers who have stated an interest in such assignments with the
assignments being offered in seniority order. When an Officer declines an
assignment, the time refused shall be credited to the Officer's accumulation. This
provision shall not apply to selection of personnel for emergencies or unplanned
overtime for which an Officer is held over or called out early. Nothing in this
provision shall be construed to give an Officer the right to refuse emergency
overtime or a junior Officer the right to refuse an overtime assignment.
7.

OFFICER IN CHARGE COMPENSATION

A Patrolman who is placed in charge of a shift when neither a Lieutenant, a Sergeant nor the Chief
is assigned to the shift shall be compensated at the Sergeant's rate. Assignment on a shift of an
aforementioned supervisor will not negate this provision if such supervisor is on special
assignment, light duty at the desk, or other non-supervisory assignment for the shift.
8.

LONGEVITY

Longevity shall be 2% of the Officer's base rate after five (5) years of service, 3% of the Officer's
base rate after ten (10) years of service, 4% of the Officer's base rate after fifteen (15) years of
service, and 5% of the Officer's base rate after twenty (20) years of service.
Longevity payments will be made at the end of the month in which the Officers' anniversary date
falls. The Borough of Pleasant Hills agrees that it will pay any longevity payment by a separate
check rather than including such longevity pay in the Police Officer's regular paycheck.
9.

MILEAGE RATE

Police Officers attending schools or traveling on official Police business, when not provided
transportation are authorized to use private transportation and they shall receive mileage at the
Internal Revenue Service reimbursement rate for each mile from the Borough Building in the
Borough of Pleasant Hills to their destination and return.

4

10.

MEAL MONEY

Police Officers attending schools or traveling on official Police business outside the Borough of
Pleasant Hills except for court appearances shall receive reimbursement of one-half of the cost of
food.
11.

UNIFORM AND CLEANING MAINTENANCE ALLOWANCE

Each Police Officer is granted an annual uniform allowance of Three Hundred and seventy-five
and 00/100 Dollars ($375.00) effective January 1, 2010, and shall be increased to Four Hundred
00/100 Dollars ($400.00) per year effective January 1, 2012. Any part of this allowance not used
in one year may be accumulated to following years.
The Borough further grants a cleaning allowance to each Police Officer in the amount of Three
Hundred and 00/100 Dollars ($300.00) per year.

In addition, the Borough shall provide a bulletproof vest to each employee requesting a vest. An
employee requesting a vest shall wear the vest while on his duty shift, with the exception of court
appearances or when excused by the Chief of Police for a special detail or purpose. The Borough shall
pay the cost of providing the bulletproof vest up to six hundred dollars ($600.00). Any cost in excess
of six hundred dollars ($600.00) shall be paid by the employee. The employee may utilize his/her
uniform allowance for any cost exceeding six hundred dollars ($600.00).
12.

VACATIONS

A. The following Vacation Schedule shall be in effect for all police officers:

After
After
After
After

completion
completion
completion
completion

of 1 year of service = 10 working days
of 5 years of service = 15 working days
of 10 years of service = 20 working days
of 15 years of service = 25 working days

B. Any Officer with three (3) weeks' vacation or more, after all full week vacations have been
picked, may pick no more than one (1)week of his vacation days on a daily basis, provided that
it does not conflict with the schedule. Requests must be made no less than two (2) weeks in
advance of the week in which the vacation day is to occur.
C. Vacation selection shall be governed by the following provisions:
Three Officers (whether Patrolman, Sergeant, or Lieutenant) may be on vacation at one time.
Only two of the three Officers may be on vacation at the same time and on the same shift. At
no time can three Officers be on vacation at the same time AND on the same shift. Only one
Sergeant or Lieutenant may be on vacation at any given time.
1st Pick -- Two weeks by seniority. Must be picked by Officer on dates indicated by his name.
If Officer does not pick by date indicated, next senior Offic~r may make his choice.

5

2nd Pick -- Rest of solid weeks' vacation allowed, by seniority, must be picked by Officer on
dates indicated by his name. If Officer does not pick by date indicated, next senior Officer may
make his choice.3rd Pick -- Any split weeks. Officer may choose single days by placing dates
on vacation schedule on days desired. If Officer does not pick vacation on dates indicated for
3rd pick, next senior Officer chooses.Any Officer who wishes any type of vacation days during
January, February, March or April, should arrange it with the scheduling Officer prior to
January 31. A choice of vacation during this period will not affect the Officer's pick of first
two weeks.
All vacation time is picked by seniority; therefore, any Officer desiring specific vacation time
that may conflict with seniority should arrange it with the scheduling Officer.
13.

PERSONAL DAYS

Each Officer will be entitled to two (2) days per year at full pay which shall be called "personal days."
Effective January 1, 2014, each officer shall be entitled to three (3) personal days per year.
An Officer has the right to take a personal day merely by notifying the Officer-in-charge no later
than sixteen (16) hours prior to the commencement of such personal day. The notice need not set
forth any reason whatsoever for such personal day. Should any Officer confront a personal
emergency which occurs within sixteen (16) hours of any shift he is scheduled to work, he may still
elect to take one ( 1) of his personal days, provided that he informs the Officer-in-charge of the
particular emergency which he confronts. In that situation, the Officer-in-charge should normally
grant the request but may refuse to grant the request if, in his reasonable judgment, a critical situation
will require the services of such officer. The Officer-in-charge may not refuse the request because
of mere scheduling difficulties, economic considerations or similar reasons. At no time, however,
may more than one man per shift be granted a personal day.
14.

BEREAVEMENT BENEFITS

A. Each Police Officer shall receive five (5) days off, with pay, in the event of the death of that
Officer's spouse, child, mother, father, guardian (provided a guardian has been so designated
to the Borough secretary), or the death of the Police Officer's spouse's mother or father.
Each Police Officer shall receive two (2) days off, with pay, in the event of the death of that
Officer's brother or sister.
Each Police Officer shall receive one (1) day off, with pay, in the event of the death of that
Officer's grandparent, spouse's grandparent or the spouse's brother or sister.
B. The Officer may augment the number of days off (i.e., with pay in any of the three above classes)
by adding any number of extra days, per occurrence, provided that such addition shall reduce the
member's holiday or vacation allowances, at the member's option by one day for every day added
to the regular number of days off, provided further that there shall be sufficient holiday or vacation
days to be reduced for this purpose. If there are no holiday or vacation days available for reduction
for a particular occurrence then the member shall not be entitled to augment the number of days
6

off within any class occurrence until such time as additional holiday or vacation days become
available.
15.

SICKLEAVE

A. Each Police Officer shall be entitled to fourteen (14) days per calendar year sick leave.
Effective January 1, 2014, one (1) sick day will be converted to a personal day entitling each
officer to thirteen (13) sick days per calendar year beginning January 1, 2014. Any unused sick
leave per year may be accumulated to a maximum of ninety (90) days. Upon retirement, the
Employer shall buy back any unused sick days at fifty percent (50%) of the employee's regular
rate of pay.

B. During the first year of employment, a Police Officer shall be entitled to seven (7) days sick
leave, which may be used at any time during that year. At the end of said year, the Police
Officer shall be entitled to the additional seven (7) days sick leave.
C. Any Police Officer who is off duty on paid or unpaid leave due to sickness or accident for five
(5) or less days in a calendar year may sell back any unused sick leave for that year not to
exceed nine (9) sick days and receive $50.00 for each sick day instead of adding the days to
the Officer's sick leave accumulation.
16.

MEDICAL INSURANCE COVERAGE

The Borough shall provide to each Police Officer and eligible members of his immediate family
the following:
A. Police Officers shall continue to be eligible for the PPO Blue Option 1 plan. Effective June 1,
2013, employees shall be responsible for ten percent (10%) of the premium cost for health
insurance coverage, eye care, and dental. In the event the total premium for these coverages
increases at a rate of ten percent (10%) or more, or in the event the employee contribution
exceeds one percent (1 %) of pay at the patrol officer's five (5) year rate, either party may
request that the contract be reopened for purposes of negotiation a change in the carriers,
plans, plan designs, or other cost containment effort. A request to reopen must be made within
ten ( 10) days of receipt of notice of an applicable rate increase and, if the parties fail to resolve
any dispute within thirty (30) days of that notice, then the parties may proceed to arbitration
before this same panel solely on the issue(s) subject to the reopener set forth above.

B. The Borough shall continue the group dental program currently in effect subject to the ten
percent (10%) employee contribution set forth above in Paragraph A.
The Borough shall continue to provide the eye care and optical services plan of insurance
currently in effect subject to the ten percent (10%) employee contribution set forth in Paragraph
A. above.

7

17. DISABILITY BENEFITS
A. Occupational Disability
I. Temporarv Occupational Disability
A temporarily disabled Police Officer shall be paid in accordance with applicable law for
the duration of his temporary occupational disability. The Borough shall be entitled to a
credit of any Worker's Compensation Benefit to which the injured Police Officer may be
entitled up to the amount paid to the Officer by the Borough.
2. Total Permanent Occupational Disability
A totally and permanently disabled Police Officer shall receive a monthly disability
pension equal to fifty percent (50%) of the officer's base monthly salary at the time of the
disability pursuant to the Borough of Pleasant Hills Pension Ordinance, as amended.
The Borough shall be entitled to a credit against the monthly disability pension benefits
herein provided for any workmen's compensation benefits, Social Security disability
benefits, third party liability benefits, or any other statutory benefits to which the injured
Police Officer may be entitled. The injured Police Officer agrees that he will take all
necessary steps to obtain any benefits to which he may be entitled because of the disability
which he received.
3. Partial Permanent Occupational Disability
A permanently partially disabled Police Officer shall be entitled to receive one year's base
salary in return for rendering to the Pleasant Hills Police Department those services, which he
is physically able to perform taking into consideration the injury, which he received. At the
end of one year, such permanently, partially disabled Police Officer shall be retired from the
Police Force and shall receive a lifetime disability pension computed by multiplying the
disabled officer's base salary at the time of his injury by his percent of disability.
B. Non-Occupational Disability
1. Basic Non-Occupational Sickness/Accident and Disability Benefit.
Non-occupational disability is a non-work-related disability, which is not covered by
workmen's compensation or the Heart and Lung Act.
For the first seven (7) calendar days off the job, the source of income is a draw against the
employee's current sick leave allocation. Assuming that this is the first disability in a year,
an employee's thirteen (13) days allowed sick leave would be reduced to 8 days at the end
of the waiting period. Additional compensation would be paid directly by the Borough
based on an employee's "Current Year Sick Leave Allocation" status.
The following table defines an employee's benefit entitlement as a function of his current
year sick leave remaining after the one week waiting period:

8

Number of Days Remaining
8Days
7Days
6Days
5Days
4Days
3Days
2Days
1 Days
0Days

Percentage of Salm
100
%
95
%
92½
%
90
%
87½
%
85
%
82½
%
80
%
77½
%

The sick leave accumulated over prior years would be reduced by one half (1/2) of one day
for each day that the employee received a supplemental payment from the Borough. In this
way, an employee with a maximum ninety (90) days of previously accumulated sick leave
could draw one hundred percent (100%) of pay for a total of one hundred eighty (180)
working days which is thirty-six (36) weeks.
2. Short Term Disability
The short term non-occupational disability payment will commence on the 8th calendar day
and provides sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 2/3%) of gross pay for twenty-six (26)
weeks, offset by the primary benefits under Social Security. In the event the Social Security
benefit exceeds sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 2/3%) of an Officer's gross pay, the
amount of the disability benefit in excess of sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 2/3%) shall
be paid to the Officer and shall not constitute an offset to his disability benefit.
3. Long-Term Disability
The long-term disability program will commence on the 181st calendar day of disability
and will continue to age 65 at sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 2/3%) of gross pay offset
by the primary Social Security benefits. In the event the Social Security benefit exceeds
sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 2/3%) of an Officer's disability benefit, the amount in
excess of sixty-six and two-thirds percent (66 2/3%) shall be paid to the Officer and shall
not constitute an offset to his disability benefit.
18.

LIFE INSURANCE, ACCIDENTAL DEATH, AND DISMEMBERMENT

A. The Borough will provide a life insurance policy for each Police Officer in the amount of Fifty
Thousand and 00/100 Dollars ($50,000.00), with a provision in each policy for double
indemnity in the event of accidental death.

B. The Borough will provide at its sole cost, accidental dismemberment benefits, in the amount of
Twenty Thousand and 00/100 Dollars ($20,000.00) for double dismemberment (two limbs or
eyes, or any combination of the same) and will provide accidental dismemberment benefits of
Ten Thousand and 00/100 Dollars ($10,000.00) for a single dismemberment, or loss of one eye.

9

19.

PENSION CONTRIBUTIONS

Police officers shall be required to contribute the maximum amount permitted by Act 600 in any
year that contributions to the police pension plan are required. In setting the contribution rate, no
participant contributions will be required unless and until foreign casualty insurance funds (state
aid) to be received yearly by the Borough by virtue of the existence of the police force of the
Borough are insufficient to satisfy the yearly funding need of the police plan.
20.

PENSION BOARD

There will always be at least one (I) member of the Police Force, (or his designated alternative),
exclusive of the Chief of Police, on the Pension Board. The chairman of the Police Bargaining
Unit shall receive a copy of any actuarial or financial statements presented to the Pension Board.
21.

PENSION BENEFITS

Each Officer shall be entitled to such pension benefits in accordance with Act 600 and as provided
under the pension plan ordinance of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, as amended.
The following regulations shall benefit such members of the Police Force of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills as shall receive honorable discharge therefrom by reason of age and service and
prescribes certain benefits available to widows or children of deceased members of the Police
Force of the Borough of Pleasant Hills under certain conditions.
A. Age and Service Requirements
1. A police officer who retires on or after 1/1/91 shall be eligible for retirement ifhe shall have
completed twenty-five (25) years of active service with the Borough of Pleasant Hills and
shall have attained the age of fifty (50) years. Notwithstanding this age and service
requirement, if any Police Officer was hired prior to December 21, 1965, he may retire under
the age and service requirements set forth above or he may retire upon completion of twenty
(20) years of service and having attained the age of sixty (60) years.
2. For any police officer who retires on or after January 1, 1991, the police officer shall be
entitled to buy back prior military service in accordance with applicable law.
B. Amount of Pension
1. Each Police Officer who shall qualify for normal retirement benefits shall upon retirement
receive a retirement pension equal to one-half (1/2) of his average base monthly salary,
including longevity payments, during the last thirty-six (36) months of his employment.
Each employee who retires on or after January 1, 1991, shall have his pension determined
on the basis of his average gross monthly compensation which is in conformance with the
decision of the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania in Palyok v. Borough of West Mifflin, 586
A.2d 366 (Pa. 1991.)
2. Upon retirement, the retired police officer will receive a sum of twenty dollars ($20.00)
per month for each full year that such police officer worked beyond his normal retirement.

The payment shall never exceed One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars per month and shall
terminate as soon as the retired police officer becomes eligible for Medicare payments.
Following completion of a cost study as required by Act 205 of 1984 and effective for any
employee retiree on or after January 1, 2008, the retired police officer will receive a sum
of One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars per month for each full year that such police officer
worked beyond his normal retirement. The payment shall never exceed One Hundred
($100.00) Dollars per month and shall terminate as soon as the retired police officer
becomes eligible for Medicare payments.
3. Each police officer who is employed by the Borough of Pleasant Hills as of January 1, 1993,
and who retires after that date with a full pension, may, at the officer's discretion, remain a
member of the medical insurance group of the Borough of Pleasant Hills for medical insurance
purposes. This section is intended to apply only to police officers employed by the Borough of
Pleasant Hills as police officers as of January 1, 1993, and their spouses and dependent
children, and does not extend to officers hired by the Borough of Pleasant Hills after that date.
The surviving spouse and/or dependent children of a police officer to whom this section applies
will be eligible to remain as a member or members of the medical insurance group of the
Borough of Pleasant Hills if the deceased police officer retired and chose the benefits outlined
in Section 16 of this Agreement. Payment for medical insurance, after the retirement of the
police officer, shall be the sole responsibility of the police officer or his surviving spouse or
surviving children, if applicable, and not of the Borough of Pleasant Hills, except that if a police
officer receives a "Disability Pension", then the Borough will be solely responsible for payment
of medical insurance.
4. The term "full pension" as referenced in this Agreement shall be defined as follows:
The amount of money received by a retired police officer who retires solely because he has
attained at least the minimum age necessary for normal retirement, and the minimum
number of years of service necessary for normal retirement, including any military time
buy-back where applicable.
C. Widow and Children's Benefits
The Borough of Pleasant Hills agrees that it will provide survivor benefits in accordance with
Act 30 and pursuant to the Pleasant Hills Borough Pension Plan Ordinance, as amended.
Pursuant to the provisions Act 51 of 2009, the Killed in Service Benefit has been eliminated
from the Pension Ordinance and provided by statute.
D. In the event that any Police Officer of the Borough of Pleasant Hills should terminate his
employment with the Borough of Pleasant Hills, for any reason, he shall be entitled to a refund
of all contributions which he has made to the Pleasant Hills Police Pension Fund, plus simple
interest on such contributions at the rate of 6%.
E. Police Officers shall be eligible to participate in the deferred compensation program
established by the Borough. The Borough shall have no obligation to contribute to this plan.

11

F. F. The Pension Plan shall be revised to incorporate a Deferred Retirement Option Provision
(DROP) consistent with the terms and conditions of Act 44 of 2009 with no cost to the
Borough.

22.

GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE

A Grievance is hereby defined as any controversy, complaint, misunderstanding or dispute over
any provision contained in the Collective Bargaining Agreement.
All disputes between the Employer and the Bargaining Unit or between the Employer and any of
its Employees relating to this Agreement, its meaning or application, shall be settled in accordance
with the following grievance procedure:
All grievances must be initiated within fifteen (15) working days of the alleged occurrence or
within fifteen (15) working days from the time it could reasonably be expected that the grievant
would have knowledge of the alleged occurrence.
Step One: The grievant must reduce his grievance to writing
to the Mayor of the Borough and the Teamsters Union. The
shall meet within five (5) working days after the presentation
in an attempt to settle the dispute. A written answer must be
within three (3) working days after such meeting.

and give or send a copy of the same
Mayor and the Police representative
of the Employee's written grievance
given by the Mayor or his appointee

Step Two: If the grievance is not settled in Step One, the grievance shall be presented in writing
to the President of the Borough Council, through the Secretary of the Borough. Borough Council
or its designee shall schedule a meeting with the Union's designee to discuss the grievance and
will answer the grievance in writing within five (5) working days of the date of that meeting.
Step Three: In the event no agreement is reached at Step Two, either the Teamsters Union or the
Employer may, upon written request, appeal the grievance to arbitration within five (5) working days
after receipt of the Step Two answer. An impartial arbitrator will be selected within five (5) working
days after the request for arbitration is made by the parties. The Federal Mediation and Conciliation
Service shall be used as a source for a list of arbitrators who are members of the National Academy
of Arbitrators and who reside in Western Pennsylvania in the event a grievance proceeds to
arbitration. If the parties are unable to mutually agree upon an impartial arbitrator, the parties shall
select the impartial arbitrator from a list of three (3) arbitrators by each party alternately removing
one name from the list until one name remains. The Employer shall strike the first name. It is agreed
that the arbitrator shall be bound by the terms ofthis Agreement and shall have no authority to modify
its terms and conditions.
The expenses of the impartial arbitrator selected, if any, shall be borne equally by the Employer
and the Teamsters Union. The Police Bargaining Unit and the Borough will each incur its own
expenses, including attorney's and witness fees.
Time limits established shall be strictly construed and may be extended only upon written agreement
of the parties. A grievance not filed within fifteen (15) working days of its occurrence or knowledge
12

D. The canine shall remain property of Pleasant Hills Borough during its entire period of service.
The Borough shall pay all expenses for food and veterinary care of the canine and basic kennel
fees while the officer is on vacation, if any. The canine officer must submit to Pleasant Hills
Borough appropriate receipts for these expenses.
E. The canine officer shall have the assignment of housing, feeding, cleaning, handling,
maintaining and being responsible for the police dog. The canine officer shall not use the police
dog to perform any services or work for any other police department, other governmental
agency, employer, or any other person whatsoever, except with the consent of the Borough of
Pleasant Hills.

F. Pleasant Hills Borough has the right to adopt, implement, revise or rescind a Canine Policy at
anytime.
G. The Parties agree and acknowledge that Pleasant Hills Borough shall have the right to

determine and designate the schedule of the canine officer and the canine to provide the most
efficient and effective use of the canine's services.
H. The Parties agree and acknowledge that in a normal workweek the canine officer shall work
40 hours per week but that he shall be compensated for working 43.5 hours per week. The
compensation for the additional 3.5 hours per week shall be paid at the overtime rate and shall
be in consideration for the additional duties of housing, feeding, cleaning, handling,
maintaining and being responsible for the canine.
I.

The Parties agree that the exact amount oftime associated with the duties of housing, feeding,
cleaning, handling, maintaining and being responsible for the canine cannot be calculated
accurately each pay period, and that the schedule set forth in Paragraph H of this Section is
reasonable and adequate compensation for those duties and takes into account all local, state,
and federal laws and regulations regarding employee compensation and overtime
compensation. The canine officer is prohibited from working in excess of the 3.5 overtime
hours per week set forth in Paragraph H of this Section for the housing, cleaning, handling,
maintaining, and being responsible for the canine without seeking prior approval from Pleasant
Hills Borough.

J. The Parties further agrees that the schedule set forth in Paragraph Hof this Section complies
with all provisions of the Collective Bargaining Agreement.

2 7. SEVERABILITY
Should any portion of this Agreement be held unlawful and unenforceable by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such decision of the court shall apply only to the specific portion thereof
directly specified in the decision. The remainder of the Agreement shall remain in full force and
effect.
This Agreement sets forth all covenants, stipulations, and provisions agreed upon by the parties
hereto, and no agent or representative of either party has authority to make and none of the parties
shall be bound by or liable for any statement, representation, promise, inducement or agreement
14

not set forth herein. This Agreement spells out the total understanding in its entirety between the
parties, including wages, salaries, pensions and all fringe benefits, and there shall be no other
additions or changes during the term of the Collective Bargaining Agreement.
Teamsters Local Union No. 205

Pleasant Hills Borough

Date

15

