AGREEMENT
between
BOROUGH OF INGRAM
and
THE BOROUGH OF INGRAM POLICE ASSOCIATION

PREAMBLE

Pursuant to the Act providing for collective bargaining between Policemen and their public
employer, the Act of June 24, 1968, P.L. 237, No. 111 (hereinafter referred to as the "Act"), this
Agreement is entered into this IJ,#c. day of December 2016 by and between the BOROUGH OF
INGRAM (hereinafter call the "Borough"), and THE BOROUGH OF INGRAM POLICE
ASSOCIATION) hereinafter called the "Association" or "Police Employees").
The Association consists of the full-time policemen of the Borough and does not include the
Chief of Police. Except as specifically set forth herein, the benefits granted pursuant to the
following Articles shall apply only to the current full-time policemen and shall not for purposes
of this Agreement include the Chief of Police.
The Borough and the Association (hereinafter collectively referred to as the "Parties"), in
consideration of their mutual promises herein set forth and their mutual interest and desire to
stabilize the Borough's relationship with the Police and to provide for peaceful, prompt and
equitable procedures to obtain maximum productivity, to prevent waste and unnecessary expense
and to attain mutual understanding, harmony and cooperation among the Police and between the
Parties, agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
Uninterrupted Operation and Continuous Service

I.
The Association recognizes that it is absolutely necessary for the Borough to be
operated on a 24 hour, seven (7) day a week basis and that the Borough's operations are properly
manned.
2. The Association and the Police accept the responsibility of ensuring that every policeman
exerts every effort to assure that all shifts are properly manned at all times. The Borough shall
utilize its' best efforts to rotate shifts amongst the Police Employees and shall not modify the
rotation of shifts unless extraordinary circumstances exist that require such modification .

f:\wpdocs\lngram\Policc Contract 2017
November 21, 2017(2:30 pm) File#

1

ARTICLE II
Term

The term of this Agreement shall commence on January !, 2017 and extend through
December 31, 2021. The Borough agrees not to disband the Police Department for the term of
the contract unless mandated by applicable law, regulation or Ordinance or as may be necessary
for reasons of economy pursuant to section 1190 of the Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 46190. In the
event that the Police Department is disbanded as a result of a merger or consolidation of
municipal Police Departments, then the Borough agrees to use it's best efforts to obtain
employment of it's Police with the consolidated/merged Police Department upon the same terms
and conditions as set forth in this Agreement.

ARTICLE III
Compensation and Overtime

I. Effective on the dates set forth below, the base annual police salaries for the period of
service specified shall be:

January!, 201Tthrough December 31, 2-0-Fl
Patrolmen

$64,029.42

January I, 20f8 through December 31, 20ffi
Patrolmen

$65,310.01

January !, 20c½9through December 31, 20l§l
Patrolmen

$66,616.21

January I, 2020 through December 31, 20ff
Patrolmen

$67,948.63

January!, 202:1through December 31, 2ofi
Patrolmen

2.

$69,307.50

A Police Employee who has attained the rank of Sergeant shall be paid, in addition to

the compensation set fo1ih in Section 1 above, the sum of One Hundred ($100.00) Dollars per
month for each month served in that position. The first and last month's payment while serving
in such position shall be prorated based upon the number of days worked.

3. Each Police Employee shall be paid one and one-half(!½) times their hourly rate for all
hours worked in excess of forty (40) hours per week as overtime pay.

f:\wpdocs\Ingram \Police Contract 20 17
November 21, 2017(2:30 pm) File#

2

Overtime shall be

allocated by seniority on a rotating basis.

The workweek is defined as that period of time

commencing on Sunday at 7:30 a.m. and ending on the following Sunday at 7:29 a.m.

4. All new full time hires will be compensated based upon the following schedule:

Service

Rate

Zero to one (I) year

70% of basic salary

One (I) to two (2) years

75% ofbasic salary

Two (2) to three (3) years

80% of basic salary

Three (3) to four(4) years

85 % of basic salary

Four( 4) to five(5)years

90% of basic salary/

Five (5) years or more

100% of basic salary

ARTICLE IV
Holidays

Each Police Employee shall be entitled to claim all paid holidays in each respective year
during the term of this Agreement. The term holiday is defined as the following:
New Year's Day
Memorial Day
Good Friday
Independence Day
Easter Sunday
Labor Day
Two (2) Personal Holidays, One (1) Personal Day*

Veteran's Day
Thanksgiving Day
Christmas Day

In the event that Police Employee works on any of the above-mentioned holidays then
he/she shall: (a) be paid eight (8) hours holiday pay and time and one-half (1.5) for any hours
worked or (b) the Police Employee may opt to be paid the holiday pay (8 hrs. straight time) and
receive one comp day off with straight time pay for 8hrs. The comp day off shall be used within
six (6) months of the holiday which gave rise to the availability of the comp day option. The
Police Employee shall notify the Police Chief, or in his absence the Borough Secretary of any
election under option (b) prior to the closing of any applicable pay period. Otherwise, the Police
Employees shall be paid under option (a). Any Police Employee who does not work a holiday is
entitled to have eight (8) hour pay at the regular rate of pay (straight time).
In the event that a Police Employee is scheduled to work a holiday and is unable to do so
due to illness, then he/she shall be entitled to eight (8) hours sick pay only, pursuant to Article
VI. A Personal Day may be used as Compensatory Time (see Article XV).
*One week's notice required to the Chief of Police.

f:\wpdocs\lngram\Policc Contract 2017
November 21, 2017(2:30 pm) File#

3

ARTICLEV
Vacations
I. Vacations for Police Employees shall be as follows:

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

After one (1) year of service
After two (2) years of service
After five (5) years of service
After ten (10) years of service
After twenty (20) years of service

One (1) week paid vacation
Two (2) weeks paid vacation
Three (3) weeks paid vacation
Four (4) weeks paid vacation
Five (5) weeks paid vacation

2. All vacations requests must be submitted to the Chief of Police no later than February
1st of each calendar year.
3. For vacations of five (5) consecutive days or more, the Police Employee shall provide
at least seven (7) days notice to the Chief of Police.
4. A Police Employee may take one (1) week vacation as single days with seven (7) days
notice to the Chief of Police.
5. Police Employees shall schedule vacations with the Chief of Police taking into
consideration efficiency of Borough operations, the need to provide adequate coverage by police
and seniority of the officers.
6. A Police Employee shall be permitted to sell one (I) week of his/her vacation days back to
the Borough. A written request for must be submitted to the Chief of Police with a copy to the
Borough Manager/Secretary.
ARTICLE VI
Sick Leave
I. All Police Employees who are full-time Police Officers of the Borough at the time of the
effective date of the Collective Bargaining Agreement ("CBA ") will be entitled to the schedule
of sick leave in accordance with this Article VI.

2. It is understood by the Parties that sick leave is a benefit earned by service and is available
when and if needed, and should no be a "right of taking" such as vacation.
3. All full-time Police Employees will be entitled to sick leave in accordance with the
following schedule:
(a) six (6) days after the first year of service
(b) nine (9) days after the second year of service
(c) twelve (12) days after the third year of service
(d) twelve (12) days for each year after which may be accumulated
or banked to one hundred eighty (180) days.
f:\wpdocs\Ingram\Policc Contract 2017
November 21, 20 I7(2;30 pm) File#

4

4. The total number of sick days which may be accumulated/banked shall be one hundred
eighty (180) days. Upon retirement, the Borough agrees to pay the retiring officer a sum equal
to a maximum of one hundred thirty (130) days of his accumulated/banked sick leave at the rate
of one-half (½) of his basic per diem salary rate at the time of retirement. Payment shall be
made by lump sum payment occurring at the next pay period after the effective date of
retirement.
5. A Police Employee shall notify the Chief of Police, or in his absence the Sergeant, no
later than eight (8) hours prior to their scheduled shift, that they will be utilizing the leave
described herein. Failure to provide such notification may result in disciplinary action against
the Police Employee, unless excused by emergent circumstances.
6. A Police Employee who is utilizing a leave described in this paragraph, for more than
three (3) consecutive days, shall provide a doctor's certificate explaining his/her absence at the
request of the Chief of Police.
7. The Borough reserves the right to send the Police Employee to the Borough Doctor in
cases of abuse of sick leave.

ARTICLE VII
Bereavement Leave
Police Employees are permitted up to and including three (3) consecutive work days absence
with pay when a death occurs in their immediate family, which is limited to father, mother, wife,
husband, sister, brother, children, mother-in law or father-in-law. All other bereavement leave
shall be permitted only for the day of the funeral, except requests for additional time shall be
made in writing to the Chief of Police who shall decide the matter in his sole discretion taking
into consideration any exceptional circumstances.

In the event that additional bereavement leave is granted, the Police Employee shall not be
entitled to compensation for the same except for the utilization of a vacation day(s) or other
available benefit days.
ARTICLE VIII
Uniform Allowances - Maintenance

1. Each Police Employee shall be entitled to an annual uniform allowance in the amount
of Seven Hundred-Fifty Dollars ($750.00) in the years 2017 through 2021 for replacement of
items of Police Employee uniforms.
2. The Police Employee shall adhere to the provisions of Resolution No. 10 of 1992
regarding Purchase Order Procedures in connection with the uniform allowance.
4. Each Police Employee shall receive the sum of Two Hundred-Fifty Dollars ($250.00)
each year during the term of this Agreement for uniform maintenance.
f:\wpdocs\Ingram\Policc Contract 2017
November 21, 2017(2:30 pm) File#

5

ARTICLE IX
Court Appearances

I. In the event that an off-duty Police Employee is required to make a court appearance in
connection with his/her employment with the Borough as a witness before the Allegheny County
District Attorney's Office, the Juvenile, Criminal or Civil Division of the Court of Common
Pleas of Allegheny County, Pennsylvania, then he/she shall be paid the sum of One HundredSixty Dollars ($160.00) per day. In the event that a Police Employee is required to make such
court appearance and is in attendance for a period of five( 5) or more hours, then he/she shall be
paid their regular hourly rate for the actual time in attendance in court in lieu of the payment of
the sum of One Hundred-Sixty Dollars($160.00) per day During the term of this Agreement,
the Police Employee shall be reimbursed upon the furnishing of a receipt for such attendance up
to Thirty Dollars ($30.00) per day for parking expenses.
2. In the event that an off-duty Police Employee is required to appear before a District
Magistrate, he/she will receive the sum of Sixty Dollars ($60.00) compensation. In the event that
a Police Employee is required to make such court appearance and is in attendance for a period of
two (2) or more hours, then he/she shall be paid their regular hourly rate for the actual time in
attendance in court in lieu of the payment of the sum of Sixty Dollars($60.00).
3. An on-duty Police Employee will be reimbursed upon the furnishing of receipts up to
Thirty Dollars ($30.00) per day for parking expenses.
4. Any payment made in accordance with this Article shall be in addition to other wage
increases as set forth herein and shall not be considered as part of base rates of wages for
overtime purposes.
5. An off-duty Police employee who is required to make a court appearance pursuant to this
Article shall not be entitled to any other additional compensation (i.e. hourly wage) other than
the amounts provided for
pursuant to this Article.
ARTICLEX
PHYSICAL AGILITY BONUS

Police Employees shall receive a Physical Agility Bonus payable annually, during the term
of this Agreement upon successful completion of the same Physical Agility Test utilized for the
hiring of new Police Employees, as follows:
After IO years of service or more
15 years of service or more
20 years of service or more

$300.00 per annual qualification
$400.00 per annual qualification
$500.00 per annual qualification

The Physical Agility Test will consist of five (5) stations as follows: (I) Trigger Pull; (2) Body
Drag; (3) Stretcher Carry; (4) 1/4 mile run; and (5) Window Climb. Successful completion of
each station shall be considered as the qualification for the Physical Agility Bonus. Timing
f:\wpdocs\lngram\Policc Contract 2017
November 21, 2017(2:30 pm) File#

6

requirements shall not be considered as part of the qualification. The cost for the Physical
Agility test shall be paid by the Borough.
ARTICLE XI
Pensions
1. All pensions for Police Employees shall be subject to the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, including but not limited to Act 600, as amended.
2. Pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the police participants in
the fund shall have a sum equal to five (5%) percent of their monthly compensation deducted as
a contribution to the retirement fund. The actuary for the pension fund, in accordance with Act
600, as amended, has determined and has provided a study that indicates that the payments by
the participants in the fund may be reduced below the aforementioned required percentage such
that that the police participants are currently deducting five (5%) percent from their monthly
compensation as a contribution to the retirement fund. Such contribution rate may be changed
annually by the Borough based upon the actuarial study detailing the condition of the fund.
3. The Parties do hereby incorporate the provisions of Ordinance No. 5 of 1994, Ordinance
No. 29 of 1994 and Ordinance 1 of2005 (Police Pension Fund Ordinances) and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania regarding the establishment and regulation of Police Pension
Plans.
4. The purpose of the foregoing three (3) paragraphs is to clarify and identify the existing
pension benefits for the Police Employee and is not contractual in nature.

ARTICLE XII
Health Care , Life Insurance, Drug and Alcohol Policy and Other Insurance
1. The Borough shall pay one hundred (100%) percent of the premium for the cost of the
current medical insurance through United Healthcare Choice Plus, vision benefits through
Vision Benefits of America (2017 only) and dental coverage through United Concordia Flex
High Option Dental Plan. Commencing in 2018, comparable vision benefits will be provided
from a new provider. The coverages shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the various
programs as more fully described in the program description booklets for each Plan, which are
incorporated herein by reference thereto.
2. The coverage set forth herein shall be available at no cost to the employee under a
Family Plan. In the event that the current Plan(s) become (a)unavailable or (b)in the event that
the premium for such coverages increases by ten percent ( I 0%) or more upon a renewal or (c)
there is a material change in authorized health care providers for the plan such that plan
participants do not have access to a UPMC physician or hospital without incurring costs/fees
beyond that which would occur for current "out-of net-work" fees and costs, then a Committee
shall be formed consisting of one person designated by the Police Association, one person
designated by the Borough Public Works Department and the Borough Secretary to choose a
f:\wpdocs\Ingram\Policc Contract 2017
November 21, 2017(2:30 pm) File#

7

reasonable and comparable health plan. The term"comparable" shall not be interpreted as
medical plan that is "identical" or "equal" to the existing coverage. The committee shall submit
it's recommendation to Borough Council for approval. In the event that the recommendation is
not approved, then the matter shall proceed under the grievance provisions of this Agreement .
The Borough shall have the right to present in such a proceeding a proposal for comparable
coverage.
3. The Borough agrees to obtain and/or maintain at its sole cost and expense, Term Life
Insurance Coverage for the Police Employees as follows:
(a) Police Employees shall be insured in the amount of Seventy-five Thousand
($75,000.00)Dollars during their employment with the Borough or while they are
obtaining sick, disability or workmen's compensation benefits.
(b) Police Employees shall be insured in the amount of Six Thousand ($6,000.00)
Dollars after retirement from duty.
(c) No funds are to be used from the Police Pension Fund for payment of the above
insurance.
6. The Borough agrees to maintain and pay the premium for Law Enforcement Liability
Coverage.
7. In the event that a Police Employee retires, so far as it is available or permitted by the
health insurance carrier/provider, the Police Employee may maintain his/her health insurance at
their sole cost and expense. The Borough shall be under no obligation to pay any sums to the
Police Employee or the carrier/provider for such continued coverage upon normal retirement.
8. The Borough and Police Department hereby adopt the Drug and Alcohol Policy set forth
in Appendix "A" attached hereto and made part hereof.
9. The Borough shall pay a Two Thousand ($2,000.00) Dollar bonus annually to a police
employee who has elected to opt out of the Borough's health insurance plan. Payment of the
bonus shall occur only after the police employee has been excluded from such coverage for a
twelve (12) month period. The police employee may obtain coverage from the then current
health insurance plan after opting out of coverage. However, no bonus shall be paid unless the
police employee has opted out of coverage for consecutive twelve (12) month periods. There
shall be no prorating of the bonus.

f:\wpdocs\Jngram\Policc Contract 2017
November 21, 2017(2:30 pm) File#

8

ARTICLE XIII
Grievances
1. Grievance Procedure Definitions:

(a) Grievance - An alleged breach or violation of this contract or a dispute arising
out of the interpretation or application of the provisions of this contract.
(b) Grievant - Any employee or group of employees claiming the alleged breach or
violation of this Contract or claiming a dispute has arisen out of the interpretation
or application of the provisions of this contract.
2. Scope of Grievance Procedure:
(a) Any matter not specifically covered by any provisions of this Contract as well as
any matter reserved to the discretion of the Borough by the statutes, legal
precedents, and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Civil Service
Commission for Firemen and Police and/or by the terms of this Agreement is not a
grievance and will not be construed as a grievance.
(b) This procedure is to be utilized in all cases.
3. Informal Settlement of Alleged Grievances:
(a) Any grievant shall first discuss and attempt to settle the alleged grievance at the
lowest appropriate level; i.e., an employee will discuss the matter with his
immediate supervisor.
(b) The grievant may attempt to resolve the alleged grievance informally; either
directly or through the Ingram Borough Police Association's designated
representative.
4. Procedural Steps for Grievance Processing:
(a) Level One -Immediate Supervisor:
If the Ingram Borough Police Association is not satisfied with the informal
disposition of the alleged grievance, such alleged grievance may be reduced to
writing within seven (7) calendar days from its occurrence or within seven (7)
calendar days from its occurrence or within seven (7) calendar days from the time
the grievant should have known or been aware of the existence or the situation
giving rise to the alleged grievance. The written grievance will be filed with the
same person with whom the informal settlement attempts were previously made.
Representatives of the Borough and the Ingram Police Association shall meet
whether with or without the presence of the grievant and attempt to settle the
grievance.
f:\wpdocs\Ingram\Policc Contract 2017
November 21, 2017(2:30 pm) File#

9

(b) Level Two - Mayor:
If the alleged grievance is not satisfactorily resolved within five (5) calendar days

from the submission of it in writing at Level One, the Ingram Police Association
may submit the alleged grievance in writing to the Mayor and/or his designated
representative within five (5) calendar days after the decision at Level One, or ten
( I 0) calendar days after the presentation of the alleged grievance in Level One,
whichever shall first occur. Representatives of the Parties shall meet and attempt
to settle the grievance.
(c) Level Three -The Council:
If the Ingram Borough Police Association is dissatisfied with the decision at Level

Two or no decision is rendered within five (5) calendar days of submission of the
alleged grievance at Level Two. The Ingram Borough Police Association may
within five (5) calendar days after a decision at Level Two or ten (IO) calendar
days after the grievance was submitted at Level Two, whichever shall first occur,
submit the grievance in writing to the Borough Council or their designee. The
Borough or its designee will consider the merits of the alleged grievance and
render a written decision within twelve (12) calendar days of the submission of the
alleged grievance to the Borough.
(d) Level Four -Arbitration:
If the Association is not satisfied with the decision at Level Three, it may, within

five (5) calendar days after a decision at Level Three, or within fifteen (15)
calendar days after the alleged grievance was submitted at Level Three, whichever
is sooner, serve written notice upon the Borough that it intends to submit the
alleged grievance to arbitration. Within eight (8) calendar days of said appeal
notice, the representatives of the parties shall confer in an attempt to reach mutual
agreement on an arbitrator. Should the parties fail to agree on an arbitrator, they
will jointly request the Pennsylvania Bureau of Mediation to provide them with a
panel of seven (7) arbitrators. The Borough will strike a name from this panel, and
the parties shall then strike alternately until only one (1) proposed arbitrator
remains. This person shall become the arbitrator for arbitration proceedings. The
decision of this arbitrator shall be authorized only to clarify and interpret the
express terms, provisions or clauses of this Agreement and does not have the
authority to enlarge, alter, modify, delete or change the express terms, provisions
or clauses of this Agreement.
(e) It is expressly agreed that the parties, may, by written agreement, enlarge the time
limits provided for in the grievance procedure.

f:\wpdocs\lngram\Policc Contract 2017
November 21, 2017(2:30 pm) File fl

ARTICLE XIV
Good and Welfare Procedure
1. The parties agree that it is desirable to have matters of joint concern discussed by and
between them on a regular basis. Therefore, a meeting shall be scheduled at the call of either
party on five (5) days written notice to the other party to take up matters affecting the good and
welfare of the employees and the Borough.

2.

At least three (3) days prior to such meeting, the designees of the parties shall confer
to prepare a mutually acceptable agenda for such meeting.

3.

It is understood and agreed that grievances will be resolved through grievance
procedures and will not be taken up at a Good and Welfare meeting.

4.

In the event a grievance is improperly placed in this procedure and not in the
grievance procedure, it shall be transferred to the grievance procedure without
prejudice providing the original filing under this paragraph
met the time limits
pertaining to the grievance procedure.

ARTICLE XV
Compensatory Time

Police Employees who are required to work overtime may receive compensatory time off on
the basis of one and a one-half (1 ½) hours compensatory time for each hour of overtime worked.
Said compensatory time shall not result in payments made under Article ill of this Agreement.
All requests for compensatory time off shall be made in writing to the Chief of Police seventytwo (72) hours in advance thereof, and shall be subject to the written approval of the Chief,
otherwise, said employee shall be paid in accordance with the provision of Article ill of the
Agreement. Compensatory time shall not accrue to more than five (5) days per year, and to be
used at the discretion of the Chief of Police.
ARTICLE XVI
Call Back Time

When a Police Employee has been discharged or relieved from duty for the day and is called
back to duty due to any circumstances, the Officer shall be paid for a minimum of two (2) hours
time at a regular hourly rate.
Any Police Employee required to commence his/her shift prior to the normal starting time of
the shift, shall be paid for a minimum of one (1) hour over and above his regular shift time at a
regular hourly rate.

f:\wpdocs\Ingram\Policc Contract 2017
November 21, 2017(2:30 pm) File#

11

Any payments made in accordance with this Article shall be in addition to other
compensation set forth in this Agreement and shall not be made a part of base rate or be
considered as part of wages for overtime or other purposes.

ARTICLE XVII
Safe Working Conditions

Police Employees shall not be required to work or use the facilities or equipment provided
by the Borough that is unsafe or hazardous or injurious to the officer's safety, well-being or
welfare. Any Police Employee with knowledge of such conditions shall report the same to the
Chief of Police and Mayor who shall make a report to the Borough Council.
ARTICLE XVIII
Personal Property

The Borough will provide, pay for and/or reimburse any Police Employee who, in the line of
duty, has any items of personal property stolen, damaged or destroyed. There shall be a cap of
One Hundred Dollars ($ 100.00) per item of property. The Borough shall make such payment
within a reasonable amount of time after the Borough has been provided with a written estimate
of the value of the item/items in question at the time of the incident. In addition, the Police
Employee shall provide a written report containing the cause of the damage theft or destruction
of the item(s).
ARTICLE XIX
Required Continuing Education

If a Police Employee is required by Federal, State, County authorities, or the Borough, or
their laws to attend a school at Borough expense, with no reimbursement to the Police Employee
or the Borough by Federal, State or County government, the Police Employee will be paid at a
rate of time and one-half (I½) for the hours spent in school, plus mileage and lunch. However,
if the Police Employee attends school as required above during his regular scheduled hours, he
will be paid his regular wages for a standard shift.

ARTICLE XX
Management Rights

In all matters, the Borough retains and reserves unto itself all powers, rights, authority,
duties and responsibilities conferred upon and vested in it by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.

f:\wpdocs\lngram\Policc Contract 2017
November 21, 2017(2:30 pm) File#

12

ARTICLEXXI
Civil Service Commission

The Borough shall, pursuant to the provisions of the Borough Code, establish and maintain a
Civil Service Commission and confer upon it the powers and obligations required by law.
ARTICLE XXII
Borough Code

This Agreement is subject to all provisions of the Borough Code of Pennsylvania.
ARTICLE XXIII
Effect of the Agreement

The parties mutually agree that the terms and conditions expressly set forth in this
Agreement represent the full and complete understanding.

ARTICLE XXIV
Severability

Any provisions of this Agreement prohibited by law shall be ineffective to the extent of such
prohibition without invalidating the remaining provisions hereof.
ARTICLEXXV
Notice of Nondiscrimination

It is the policy of the Borough and the Police Employee that the provisions of this
Agreement shall be applied to all Police Employees, excluding the Chief of Police, without
regard to rank, color, religion, creed, sex, national origin or political affiliation.
There shall be no discrimination, interference, intimidation, restraint, or coercion by the
Borough or any of its agents, against any members of the Police Force because of his
membership in the Collective Bargaining Unit or participation in the grievance and/or arbitration
process.
No Police Employee employed by the Borough waives any of his rights, privileges or
immunities afforded to the Police Employee under Constitution of the United States of America
or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any laws the flow therefrom.

f:\wpdocs\Ingram\rolicc Contract 2017
N ovembcr 21, 201 7(2:30 pm) File#

13

ATTEST:

BOROUGH OF INGRAM

/
A,l-1:.I-vicJL{i.

ixccJtt__,:

Deborah A. Stecko
Borough Secretary-Treasurer

·ch,ard Nucci
__)
Presiaent of Council

WITNESS:

BOROUGH OF INGRAM
POLICE ASSOCIATION

f:\wpdocs\lngram\Police
Contract 2017
November 21, 2017(2:30 pm) File#

14

r

