AGREEMENT
BY AND BETWEEN
THE TOWNSHIP OF MOON, PENNSYLVANIA
AND
THE MOON TOWNSHIP POLICE OFFICERS
FOR THE PERIOD OF JANUARY 1, 2018
THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2021

,_

\

'•""-"
I~'

_..;.._

~~

.

..

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION 1 PARTIES TO AGREEMENT ..............................................................................................
3
SECTION 2 HOURS OF WORK ..............................................................................................................
3
SECTION 3 WAGES AND COMPENSATION ......................................................................................
5
SECTION 4 CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT .........................................................................................
8
SECTION 5 LEAVE ...................................................................................................................................
9
SECTION 6 INSURANCE .......................................................................................................................
13
SECTION 7 PENSION AND PENSION FUND ....................................................................................
15
SECTION 8 RESIDENCY .......................................................................................................................
21
SECTION 9 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE ............................................................................................
21
SECTION 10 OFFICER'S BILL OF RIGHTS ......................................................................................
23
SECTION 11 TERM AND SCOPE OF AGREEMENT .......................................................................
24
SECTION 12 WITNESS OF AGREEMENT .........................................................................................
25
APPENDIX A - VISION BENEFITS ......................................................................................................
26
APPENDIX 8- DENTAL BENEFITS ...................................................................................................
29
ATTACHMENT 1 TO TWELVE HOUR SHIFT
ADDENDUM - FOUR WEEK ROTATION SCHEDULE ....................................................................
31
ATTACHMENT 2 TO TWELVE HOUR SHIFT
ADDENDUM - CALL OUT MASTER SHEET - 6 HR INCREMENTS ............................................
33
TWELVE (12) HOUR WORK SHIFT ADDENDUM
TO THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN
THE TOWNSHIP OF MOON AND THE MOON TOWNSHIP POLICE OFFICERS ......................35

April 15, 2020

SECTION 1 PARTIES TO AGREEMENT
This agreement is entered into by and between MOON TOWNSHIP, a Municipal
Corporation of the County of Allegheny and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, hereinafter
referred to as "Township" and the MOON TOWNSHIP POLICE ASSOCIATION, hereinafter
referred to as "Police Association"; recognized as the sole and exclusive representative of all
POLICE OFFICERS OF MOON TOWNSHIP, excluding the chief and captain(s), hereinafter
referred to as "Policemen" and/or "Officers", pursuant to Act No. 111 of June 17, 1968 of the
Legislature of the Commonwealth, duly approved by the Governor of Pennsylvania.
SECTION 2 HOURS OF WORK

2:10 Eight (8) hours shall constitute a normal day's work and forty (40) hours a normal week's
work. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, all work in any one day in excess of eight (8)
work hours shall be paid for at a rate of time and one half (1 ½) and any work performed during
non-scheduled hours shall be paid for at a rate of time and one-half (1 ½). A Policeman shall not
be paid both daily and weekly overtime for the same hours worked.

Vacation days and personal days shall count as actual time worked in determining if
overtime is generated; provided, however, that sick days and compensatory time shall not count
as actual time worked in determining if overtime is generated. For example, if an Officer works
an 8-hour work schedule which would otherwise total more than 40 hours of pay in a one (1)
week pay period, any sick days or compensatory time off used during that period would not
count as hours worked in calculating overtime. Therefore, any other provision of this Agreement
notwithstanding, pay for hours beyond 40 hours in that pay period would instead be calculated
as straight time and not overtime until the Officer actually works more than forty (40) hours in
that pay period.

A day is a continuous 24 hour period beginning at the regular starting time of a
Policeman's shift. A work week is a seven (7) consecutive day period beginning at 12:01 a.m.
Monday.

As has been accepted practice, the Chief of Police shall retain the discretion to provide a
police officer leave in lieu of overtime, when the officer is engaged in Officer Requested
Training, Voluntary Periodic Team Training (i.e. C.I.R.T. etc.), and Instructor/Specialist Training
and Re-Certifications. Agreements between the Chief of Police and police officers may be made
to address situations not covered above (i.e. D.A.R.E., Mock Crash, etc.)

April 15, 2020

2:20 Overtime shall be determined by seniority and crew rotation as follows: the off crew shall
be first offered the overtime, and if the overtime need is not fulfilled, then the on duty crew will
be offered four (4) hours of overtime, then four (4) hours of overtime will be offered to the
oncoming crew. All crews will be offered the overtime based upon the seniority of the members
of the crew, with the most senior man first being offered, and the next most senior man in the
crew being offered.

Any officer who refuses overtime will not be again offered overtime until the overtime has
been offered to all other members of the crew. The rotation will continue as above. The shift
commander will keep a list available to his crew to assure compliance with the above provisions.
The Chief of Police or his designee shall be responsible for seeing that all crews are adequately
staffed and shall have the authority to direct any available officer to work overtime if he deems it
necessary.

2:30 Work will be scheduled in an effort to accommodate the Police demands in a manner that
remains compatible with the needs of the community. This does not supplant any existing
contractual provision. The Township retains jurisdiction to assure and to evaluate the
implementation of this provision.

2:40 Also, Policemen may, by mutual agreement, change shifts with one another for personal
reasons, subject to the Chiefs prior approval, which will not be unreasonably withheld. This
provision cannot be used to generate additional overtime to the Township.

However, if an officer who has, with the Chiefs prior approval, switched with another
officer incurred overtime on the shift to which he has switched, he shall be paid that overtime.

2:50 Officers scheduled or called out to work overtime may be sent home without additional
compensation, beyond pay for hours worked and appropriate overtime, if an overtime detail is
cancelled or is no longer warranted, at the discretion of the Chief of Police.

April 15, 2020

SECTION 3 WAGES AND COMPENSATION

3:10 WAGES - The 2018, 2019, 2020, and 2021 hourly wages of the police bargaining unit
members shall be:
Position

2018

2019

2020

2021

Lieutenant

$49.10

$50.70

$52.35

$54.05

Sergeant

$46.79

$48.31

$49.88

$51.50

Master Patrolman

$45.35

$46.82

$48.34

$49.91

Senior Patrolman

$44.38

$45.82

$47.31

$48.85

Juvenile Officer

$45.28

$46.75

$48.27

$49.84

Note: Master Patrolman and Corporal are terms for the same rank.

3:11 The present Juvenile Officer shall remain a Senior Patrolman with Corporal wages and
shall be eligible for the same percentage and "cents per hour" increases as a Senior Patrolman,
so long as he remains the Juvenile Officer. The present Juvenile Officer shall be eligible to take
the Corporal's test for promotion. Shall he leave the Juvenile Officer's position or be transferred
from the position and should the Township elect to have a Juvenile Officer, his successor shall
be placed as appropriate on the scale leading to or at the Senior Patrolman wage rate.

3:12 SHIFT COMMANDER - When a shift is manned only by Patrolmen, the Township shall
designate the acting shift commander who shall be paid at a Sergeant's rate of pay. However, if
this officer is not yet a Senior Patrolman, the Sergeant's pay will reflect the percentage of the
officer's non-Senior Patrolman's rate that the officer currently receives.

3:20 NEW HIRES - Newly hired Patrolmen shall advance toward the Senior Patrolman's rate as
follows: during the first six (6) months of employment, a non-Senior Patrolman shall be paid at a
rate equal to seventy percent (70%) of the rate paid a Senior Patrolman; in the second six (6)
months of employment, that employee shall receive a rate equal to seventy-five percent (75%)
of the salary of a Senior Patrolman; in the second year of employment a non-Senior Patrolman
shall receive eighty percent (80%) of the rate of a Senior Patrolman; in the third year of
employment a non-Senior Patrolman shall receive eighty-five percent (85%) of the rate of a
Senior Patrolman; in the fourth year of employment a non-Senior Patrolman shall receive ninety
percent (90%) of the rate of a Senior Patrolman; and in the fifth year of employment a non-Senior Patrolman shall receive ninety-five (95%) of the rate of a Senior Patrolman. In the
discretion of the Township, prior service in other police departments may be credited for the
purpose of establishing a newly hired patrol officer's starting wages and subsequent
advancement toward "Senior Patrolman rate."

April 15, 2020

3:21 PROBATION - All newly hired officers shall serve a one (1) year probation period. This one
( 1) year probation period shall not include time spent by such Officers at the Allegheny County
Training Academy. Probationary Police Officers shall be covered by the Accident & Sickness
Insurance Policy which covers non-probationary police officers. Furthermore, they shall be
limited to utilizing no more than six (6) paid sick days during the one (1) year period of their
probation. Any police Officer absent from work during the first year, for any reason, for a period
of two consecutive work weeks or more will have his/her probationary period extended by an
amount of time equal to the absence. Any employee in a probationary status may be
terminated with or without cause.
3:22 PART-TIME POLICE RESTRICTION - The Township shall not hire part-time police officers
for the duration of this Agreement.
3:30 LONGEVITY - At the beginning of the sixth year of service, a Police Officer shall be paid a
longevity of increment of three quarters of a percent (0.0075%) of the Officer's base yearly
wage (the Officer's current regular hourly wage multiplied by 2080 hours.) Such a longevity
increment will increase annually by two tenths of a percent (0.002%) of the Officer's base yearly
wage, until reaching the maximum longevity of service increment of three and 15 hundredths of
a percent (0.0315%) of the Officer's Base Yearly wage.
3:40 OFF-DUTY COURT - Officers who are required to attend criminal or civil hearings or
trials, mental health hearings, conferences with the District Attorney's Office, juvenile intake
hearings, coroner's proceedings, or departmental hearings during their off-duty hours and as a
result of their on-duty employment, excluding Preliminary Hearings held at a District Court, shall
be paid the greater of four (4) hours at time and one half (1-1/2) their hourly rate or the actual
hours worked at the appropriate overtime rate. However, Officers who are required to attend,
during their off-duty hours and as a result of their on-duty employment, any such proceedings or
hearings that take place in the Township or in a community that is adjacent to, neighbors,
borders, or abuts the Township by land or by water, shall be paid the greater of two (2) hours at
time and one half (1-1/2) their hourly rate or the actual hours worked at the appropriate overtime
rate.

Officers required to attend Preliminary Hearings at District Court shall continue to be
paid the greater of two (2) hours at time and one-half ( 1-1/2) their hourly rate or the actual hours
worked at the appropriate Overtime rate. When Officers engage in these required off-duty
appearances they shall be reimbursed at the IRS standards for each mile traveled in their own
vehicles plus any parking fees incurred as a result of such activities. An Officer's compensation
and expenses shall be reduced by any witness and mileage fee received by the Officer from any
other source except that an Officer may retain the court appearance fee up to $7 .10.

April 15, 2020

Officers scheduled for court appearances on a day they are scheduled to be off who are
not the affiant, including in connection with a task force such as DANET, may be placed in
unpaid "on call" status instead of going to court, at the sole discretion of the Chief of Police. If
the Officer, however, is the subject of a Court-issued subpoena, the Command Staff shall
continue to have the right to coordinate with the Court and/or District Attorney's office to have
the Officer placed on "on-call" status.
Court time and other details shall not run concurrently, and officers scheduled for more
than one court appearance in a day will receive only one minimum payment or payment for
actual hours worked, whichever is greater.
3:41 ON-DUTY COURT - An Officer making a court appearance while on duty during a
regularly scheduled shift, may use a department vehicle, if available, at the discretion of the
Police Chief.
3:42 EMERGENCY CALL OUTS - In the event an Officer is called out for Emergency Duty,
Including Prisoner Transports, the Officer shall be guaranteed a minimum of two (2) hours pay
at the Officer's Overtime Rate (time and one-half) . If the Call Out exceeds two (2) hours, the
Officer shall be compensated for the total number of hours worked at the Officer's Overtime
Rate (time and one-half).
3:50 USE OF PRIVATE AUTO - When an Officer uses his personal vehicle on police business,
he shall be reimbursed for mileage at the rate established by IRS standards then in effect.
3:60 EDUCATION INCENTIVE - The Township shall provide a tuition refund to Policemen who
take courses or programs, provided that such courses or programs are directly related to the
services rendered by the Policeman; and provided further that prior to enrolling for the course or
program, the written approval of the Chief of Police and Township Manager are obtained.
The refund shall be limited to nine hours per term, and the refund shall be computed on
the hourly cost; provided, nevertheless, the maximum hourly cost upon which the refund shall
be paid shall not exceed $75.00 per hour.
The refund shall be based upon the grade received by the Policeman, i.e.:
Grade C - 25% of tuition refunded to Policeman
Grade B - 40% of tuition refunded to Policeman
Grade A - 50% of tuition refunded to Policeman
If it is a fail/pass course or program, 40% will be refunded to the Policeman, if passed.
Satisfactory proof must be submitted to the Chief of Police of the grade received by the
Policeman.

April 15, 2020

3:70 Association Dues - The Township shall deduct Association dues each pay from every
Association member and forward them to the Association. The rate of deduction will be
determined by the Moon Township Police Officers' Association By-Laws and Constitution.
The Association shall indemnify and hold harmless the Township against any and all
claims, demands, suits or other forms of liability that shall arise out of, or by reason of action
taken or not taken by the Township for the purpose of complying with any provision of this
clause.
SECTION 4 CLOTHING AND EQUIPMENT
4:10 The Township will issue new Policemen with all necessary clothing and equipment when
they enter Township service. All Policemen other than probationary Policemen will be entitled to
an annual clothing and equipment allowance in the amount of eight-hundred dollars ($800). This
allowance includes non-prescription sunglasses and shall be allotted to each Officer's clothing
and equipment allowance account at the first of each year.
4:11 The Township will replace each officer's body armor at the expiration of the armor's
warranty. The officers may select his/her body armor, provided that it meets the minimum
ballistic requirements established by the Township. In the event that an officer has funds in a
previously established account for the purchase of body armor, then the Township may use
such funds toward the purchase of the officer's armor.
4:12 If an Officer's uniform is irreparably damaged in the performance of his duties, the
damaged item shall be replaced by the Township without charging or allocating the cost of
replacement to the Officer's uniform allowance.
4:13 Officers shall not be permitted to draw down their clothing allowance account below zero,
unless agreed to in advance by the Township Manager. Any officer who draws his/her account
below zero shall be responsible to promptly pay their negative balance through a payroll
deduction if necessary.
4:14 Police Officers may accumulate their clothing allowance to a maximum accumulation of
three (3) years' allowance. This includes the current year's allowance and the two previous
years.
4:20 UNIFORM CLEANING ALLOWANCE - Each officer will be entitled to an annual uniform
cleaning allowance of one hundred and seventy five dollars ($175).

April 15, 2020

SECTION 5 LEAVE

5:10 COMPENSATORY TIME -An Officer may elect to take compensatory time in lieu of
payment for overtime worked, but only under the guidelines established by the Department.
These guidelines will not be established so as to unreasonably deny the Officer the use of this
form of leave. Approval of requests to use compensatory time shall be within the sole discretion
of the Chief of Police. Requests to use compensatory time off may be denied where use of
compensatory time off would unduly disrupt operations or constitute an unreasonable burden on
the Township. The parties acknowledge that the use of compensatory time off would unduly
disrupt operations and constitute an unreasonable burden on the Township if overtime or
additional compensatory time off would result.
For Officers hired prior to July 24, 2015, payment for compensatory time shall be capped
at a maximum of 480 hours. For Officers hired on or after July 24, 2015, payment for
compensatory time shall be capped at 240 hours. Once an officer reaches the 480- or 240-hour
threshold, as the case may be, the Officer may not earn any additional compensatory time until
his or her balance falls below the applicable maximum.

5:11 An Officer choosing compensatory time will receive time off equal to the overtime worked
and requested as compensatory time; in the Officer will receive during the same pay period the
overtime is worked, payment equivalent to one half (1/2) the time worked multiplied by the
Officer's regular hourly rate. (example: 8 hours overtime worked and requested as
compensatory time - the Officer receives eight hours of compensatory time and four hours of
pay at his regular hourly wage). Compensatory time taken shall not count as actual time worked
in determining if additional overtime is generated.
5:12 Officers may use compensatory time in a single increment of two (2) hours or four (4)
hours, at either the beginning or end of their shifts, but not both and provided that it does not
cause overtime. Use of compensatory time off in such two (2) hour or four (4) hour increments is
at the discretion of the shift supervisor. This use of compensatory time does not require three
(3) days' notice for use but is subject to all other rules regulating use of compensatory time.
Requests to use compensatory time at the start of the shift must be made ninety (90) minutes
prior to the start of the shift.
5:20 PERSONAL DAYS - Each Officer with six (6) months of service will be granted four (4)
personal days annually with pay. Officers may carry one unused Personal Day to the next
calendar year for use during that year.
5:30 FAMILY DEATH LEAVE - In the event an Officer attends the funeral, the Township shall
allow an Officer up to five (5) regularly scheduled working days with pay in the event of the
death of an employee's spouse, child, or parent, and up to three (3) regularly scheduled working
days with pay in the event of the death of a brother, sister, father-in-law, mother-in-law, brotherin-law, sister-in-law, grandmother or grandfather.
5:40 SICK LEAVE - An Officer who is otherwise eligible to receive short-term disability benefits
must first exhaust paid sick leave before beginning to receive short-term disability benefits;

April 15, 2020

provided, however, that an Officer will be permitted to retain up to 120 hours of sick leave and
still be eligible for short-term disability benefits.
5:41 Sick days will accumulate at a rate of one and one quarter ( 1-1/4) per month for a total of
fifteen (15) per year with a maximum accumulation of one hundred and twenty days (120);
however all fifteen (15) will be available for use at the first of January.
An Officer hired prior to July 24, 2015 who would terminate his service with the
Township during the course of any year would only be eligible to buy back sick days that had
accrued to the point of termination. Officers hired on or after July 24, 2015 shall not be eligible
to sell unused accumulated sick days back to the Township.
Any Officer who does not use any Sick Days in a calendar year will be given one (1)
additional Personal Day for use in the following calendar year.
5:42 For Officers hired prior to July 24, 2015, the Township shall buy back a maximum of fifteen
(15) sick days per year per officer except at the termination of an Officer's services for
retirement or death of the Officer when the entire total of accumulated sick days will be eligible
for buy back. Officers hired on or after July 24, 2015 shall not be eligible to sell unused
accumulated sick days back to the Township.
5:43 The Township will buy back sick days annually at a rate of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per
eight (8) hour sick day.
5:44 Upon retirement, the Township shall buy back accumulated sick days as follows:
a. For officers who retire within sixty (60) days of becoming eligible for retirement,
accumulated sick days to a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) days shall be
remunerated at full pay (i.e. 100% of the officer's hourly rate x 8 hours x total days
accumulated not to exceed 120 days) provided the officer deposits the proceeds with the
ICMA-RC (International City/ County Management Association - Retirement
Corporation) PEHP Plan or its equivalent, to be utilized for post-employment health
benefits. Should the officer opt not to deposit the proceeds with ICMA-RC PEHP, sick
days shall be remunerated at ninety (90%) percent of pay (i.e. 90% of the officer's hourly
rate x 8 hours x total days accumulated not to exceed 120 days). An officer may sell
back a portion of accumulated days at full pay provided that the proceeds of all days
remunerated at full pay are deposited with ICMA-RC. The remaining sick days may be
sold for cash at ninety (90%) percent as outlined in this section.

b. For those officers who otherwise fail to retire within sixty (60) days of becoming eligible
for retirement, accumulated sick days to a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) days
shall be remunerated at the rate of eighty dollars ($80.00) per eight (8) hour sick day or
one hundred twenty ($120.00) per twelve (12) hour sick day.

April 15, 2020

5:45 Sick time in increments of less than eight (8) hours will not be available unless the
employee becomes ill on duty.
5:46 OFF-DUTY DISABILITY INSURANCE BENEFIT -Any Officer who is absent due to an offduty disability and elects to receive any insurance benefits provided in this Agreement shall
properly complete and sign all insurance forms as required by the Township and the carrier.
5:47 CATASTROPHIC ILLNESS/ INJURY SICK DAY BANK - The Township will maintain a
sick day bank for catastrophic illnesses or injuries sustained by officers. The Township shall
allocate to the bank two (2) days per officer per year to a maximum of one hundred and eighty
(180) days. These days will be equally available to all Officers and may be utilized only when an
Officer has exhausted his or her own sick leave and needs additional sick leave to recover from
a catastrophic injury or illness. The Police Association must approve by two thirds (2/3) majority
the donation and number of days to be provided to the qualifying Officer. Use of days from the
Catastrophic Illness/ Injury Sick Day Bank is conditional on the approval of the Township
Manager or his designee; however, this approval may not be arbitrarily denied without "good
cause".
5:50 PAID HOLIDAYS - The following days will be considered Holidays: New Year's Day,
President's Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day, Independence Day (July 4th), Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day, the Friday immediately following Thanksgiving, Veteran's Day, and
Christmas Day. Holidays not noted as being observed on a specific date will be observed on the
date legally observed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. For the holidays of Thanksgiving
Day, Christmas Day and New Year's Day, the Township reserves the right to limit and/ or deny
leave requests for these holidays, and also for the day prior and after these holidays so that an
adequate workforce is maintained.
5:51 An Officer who works on a Holiday shall receive for each such Holiday worked, total
compensation for such work at two and one-half (2-1/2) times his regular hourly rate. For the
first eight (8) hours of the Holiday, the Officer shall receive one and one- half (1-1/2) his hourly
rate for each hour worked which is to be paid in the pay period the Holiday was worked. The
additional eight (8) hours straight time will be titled Holiday Pay and will be compensated as
described in Section 5:54. All hours over the initial eight (8) will be compensated at two and
one-half (2-1/2) the Officer's hourly rate and paid in the pay period the additional hours were
worked.
5:52 An Officer whose regularly scheduled day off shall fall on a Holiday shall receive eight (8)
hours pay at his straight time rate for that Holiday treated as Holiday Pay as described in
Section 5:54, or an additional paid day off, the option to be determined at the mutual consent of
the Township and the Officer.
5:53 If any Holiday shall fall within an Officer's vacation, the Officer's vacation allowance shall
be charged for each scheduled workday used and he shall receive eight hours (8) pay for each
vacation day charged in the pay period the vacation was taken. The Officer shall also receive
eight (8) hours straight time for that Holiday at the time noted in Section 5:54.

April 15, 2020

5:54 Holiday Pay shall be paid by the Township in one lump sum, between the last payday in
November and the first payday in December, except for Holidays actually enjoyed as paid days
off in lieu of Holiday Pay.

5:60 VACATION - Police Officers shall be entitled to annual paid vacation based on the
following schedule:
More than
More than
More than
More than
More than
More than
More than
More than
More than
More than
More than
More than

1 year of service
6 years of service
8 years of service
9 years of service
10 years of service
11 years of service
12 years of service
14 years of service
16 years of service
18 years of service
20 years of service
23 years of service

10 working
15 working
16 working
17 working
18 working
19 working
20 working
21 working
22 working
23 working
24 working
25 working

days
days
days
days
days
days
days
days
days
days
days
days

5.61 The Chief of Police shall be given a minimum of three (3) days' notice for all vacation days
in order to determine that the schedule will not be adversely affected by the taking of these
vacation day or days.
5:62 The anniversary date shall be used in determining the years of service for vacation
purposes.
5:63 Any Officer who is on a scheduled vacation and is asked to return to work, shall be paid his
base rate and given additional time off to compensate for additional vacation.
5:64 Officers must provide twenty-four (24) hours advance notice to cancel scheduled vacation,
compensatory or personal time, subject to the approval of the Chief of Police or his designee.

April 15, 2020

SECTION 6 INSURANCE

6:10 FALSE ARREST INSURANCE - The Township will provide false arrest insurance for each
Police Officer.
6:11 The Township shall provide the Police Association with a copy of the endorsement
rather than providing each employee with a copy.
6:20 LIFE INSURANCE - Life Insurance coverage shall be one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000). The Township shall have the option of changing the insurance carrier provided that
the new carrier is reputable, and the terms and conditions of the coverage are not less favorable
than those presently enjoyed and provided that all employees have continuous coverage and
that there are no additional exclusionary clauses.
6:21 On retirement, each Officer shall receive a fully paid Life Insurance Policy, or a policy paid
for or funded by the Township in the principle sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000).
6:30 SHORT-TERM DISABILITY - The Township shall continue during the term of this
Agreement short term sickness and accident disability income insurance which shall pay
benefits of seventy percent (70%) of a Police Officer's base weekly salary for a period of twentysix (26) weeks to a Police Officer who is disabled by reason of a non-- service-related sickness
or accident.
6:31 LONG-TERM DISABILITY - The Township shall continue long-term disability income
insurance which shall pay benefits of sixty-six and two thirds percent (66-2/3%) of a Police
Officers base weekly salary to a Police Officer who becomes totally disabled by reason of a
non-service-related sickness or accident, which benefits shall commence after twenty-six (26)
weeks and continue to age sixty-five (65) or attainment of normal retirement age, whichever
shall first occur. The Township shall make every reasonable effort to purchase a plan of longterm disability income insurance which requires no evidence of the insurability of any Police
Officer.
6:40 HOSPITALIZATION AND MEDICAL INSURANCE - The Township will provide officers and
their eligible dependents healthcare coverage under UPMC Consumer Adv Gold HAS PPO
$2000/$4000 deductible. Officers shall continue to contribute the first twenty-five percent (25%)
of the deductible and twenty-five percent (25%) of the annual increase in the cost of premiums
for health insurance, vision care, and the dental plan above the July 31, 2016 rates. Each year
beginning in June through July 31, the Moon Township Police Association can exercise the right
to a Health Care Reopener which will be triggered by any projected premium increase of 10% or
greater.
The Township shall have the right to change the existing health insurance coverage to a
plan and/or carrier which is comparable to the coverage that is presently being provided. In
applying the term "comparable" in this context, the Township shall consider costs, benefits,
providers and facilities. The Union, however, retains the right to grieve the Township's
determination that the plan and/or carrier is "comparable." If the Union does not agree that a

April 15, 2020

plan and/or carrier selected by the Township is "comparable", it will so state, in writing, to the
Township within fourteen (14) calendar days of the plan and/or carrier being presented to the
Union by the Township, or such longer period as mutually agreed to by the parties in writing. In
that event, the Township may not unilaterally implement the proposed new plan and/or carrier,
however, it may immediately process the dispute before a neutral arbitrator selected pursuant to
the arbitration step of the grievance procedure. The decision of the arbitrator on this
"comparable" issue, shall be issued within forty-five (45) calendar days of the Union's written
notice contesting that the plan and/or carrier selected by the Township is "comparable" and
shall be final and binding and will determine if the Township is authorized to implement the new
plan and/or carrier. This paragraph is not intended to trigger any obligatory discussions of officer
contributions toward the cost of coverage.
Beginning August 1, 2016 and thereafter, Officers shall contribute twenty-five percent
(25%) of the annual increase in the cost of premiums for health insurance, vision care and the
dental plan above the July 31, 2016 rates.
If the Employer receives notice or information indicating that its health care plan costs
will subject the plan to the Affordable Care Act's "Cadillac Tax" excise tax, the Employer will
give the Union written notice of that fact and the parties will immediately meet to discuss
changes in the plan design, plan and/or plan carrier in order to avoid the imposition of the tax. If
no agreement is reached within fourteen (14) days of the Employer's written notice to the Union
regarding this issue, then the parties will proceed to an expedited arbitration proceeding with an
arbitrator selected pursuant to the terms of the Collective Bargaining Agreement's grievance
and arbitration procedure. The sole purpose for that expedited arbitration proceeding will be for
the arbitrator to modify the plan, plan design and/or plan carrier in order to eliminate the
exposure to the Cadillac Tax. The decision of the arbitrator on this issue shall be issued within
forty (40) calendar days of his or her appointment.
6:41 In the event of the enactment of a federal or Pennsylvania Commonwealth health
insurance plan with mandated provisions, clause 6:40 of this Agreement may be reopened to
address those mandates. It is not the intention of the Township or the Police Association to
lessen the existing health insurance plan provisions.
6:44 POST EMPLOYMENT HEAL TH CARE - The Township will continue to provide officers a
Post-Employment Health Benefit Plan (PEHP) pursuant to Internal Revenue Code Section 501
(c) (9) and shall contribute seven hundred dollars ($700.00) annually in each officer's ICMA/RC
PEHP trust account through the term of this agreement.
6:45 POST EMPLOYMENT HEAL TH CARE - Any officer who elected to retire from the
Department during the term of the Agreement covering the Period of January 1, 2006 through
December 31, 2009 shall be eligible to receive from the Township a contribution toward I
reimbursement of up to $400.00 per month toward the cost of post-retirement healthcare
insurance coverage for the officer and his / her spouse. Eligibility for such contribution toward
the cost of post- retirement healthcare insurance coverage shall begin on the date of retirement
and shall expire ten (10) years thereafter. The Township's obligation to provide this contribution
toward the cost of post-retirement healthcare shall terminate if the retiree is or becomes

April 15, 2020

employed or self-employed or has access to private medical insurance coverage or Medicare
through his/her spouse if his/her spouse has private medical insurance or Medicare or any
opportunity to obtain such coverage. By January 1 of each year, the retiree shall provide to the
Township with written certification that neither the retiree nor his/her spouse have health
insurance/coverage available as outlined above.
If the retiree of his/her spouse becomes employed/self-employed and health insurance is
available from any source, the retiree must notify the Township in writing within seven (7) days.
This benefit expired at 11:59 p.m. on December 31, 2009.

6:50 VISION CARE - The Township shall provide for each Officer and his dependents vision
care benefits as described in Appendix "A".
6:51 Prescription sunglasses shall also be included but will be replaced only when prescription
change is necessary.
6:60 DENTAL PLAN - The Township shall provide each Officer and his dependents with a
"MASTER UCR 100 DENTAL PLAN" as described in Appendix "B".
SECTION 7 PENSION AND PENSION FUND

7:10 The monthly pension or retirement benefit for a Police Officer retiring after December 31,
1976, shall be computed at one half (1/2) the monthly average salary of such Police Officer
during the last thirty-six months of his employment.
7:11 The Township shall supply the Police Bargaining Unit Representative with a copy of the
annual actuarial report of the Township's pension actuary within seven (7) days following the
receipt by the Township.
7:12 The Police Bargaining Unit may appoint two (2) representatives to attend the annual
financial review of the Police Pension Fund by the Fund Trustee.
7:13 The widow/ widower of a member who has retired on a pension and dies or who has met
the age and years of service requirements to retire on a pension and dies, shall receive for the
remainder of his or her life a survivor's benefit of 50% of the pension benefit that the member
was receiving, or was eligible to receive, at the time of death. If no spouse survives such
deceased member, or if such spouse survives then later dies, then the survivor benefit shall be
paid to the child / children of such member until reaching 18 years of age or 23 years of age if
attending college.
7:14 Any member of the Police Force who, for any reason whatsoever, shall be ineligible to
receive a pension after having contributed to the Police Pension Fund, shall be entitled to a
refund of all such monies paid by him into such fund, plus all interest earned by such monies
while in the Police Pension Fund as determined by the Township immediately upon
discontinuance of his employment with the Police Force. If such discontinuance is due to death,
such monies shall be paid to his designated beneficiary, or in the absence thereof, to his estate.

April 15, 2020

7:15 Any Employee retiring after twenty-five (25) years of police service for the Township shall
receive an additional five dollars ($5.00) per month for each completed year of service in excess
of twenty-five (25) years. Said additional monthly payment shall not exceed one hundred dollars
($100.00).
7:16 Effective January 1, 1992, and from year to year thereafter, contributions by Bargaining
Unit Employees into the Police Pension Fund are suspended subject to an annual report to the
actuarial soundness of the Pension Plan.
7:17 In the event it is determined that contributions beyond those available to the Township
from the State, as a result of the fact that the Township maintains a police department, are
necessary to maintain the actuarial soundness of the Pension Plan, said contributions shall first
be made by the Police Bargaining Unit Employees up to the maximum permitted by law before it
shall become necessary for the Municipality to make contributions using local taxpayer dollars.

NOTE 1: In order to implement Section 7: 16 in 1992, the Pension Plan should be
reviewed to be certain that this action is actuarially sound and lawful.
NOTE 2: The sections 7:16 and 7:17 language above refers to the fact that the
Township receives two (2) "units" of Act 205 Foreign Fire Casualty Premium tax monies for
each Police Officer and one (1) such "unit" for each non-uniformed employee. The Township will
not require any pension contribution by Police Officers in any year until it has first applied to the
Police Pension Plan all Act 205 State monies received by the Township as a result of the
"Police Units" (2 per Officer) attributed to the Township.
7:18 Effective January 01, 2000, the Township agrees to reduce the Normal Retirement Age
from fifty-five (55) years of age to fifty (50) years of age. This provision does not affect the
service increment set forth in Section 7: 15 of this Agreement.
7:19 The pension plan shall be amended to reflect the repeal of the Act 600 killed-in- service
benefit in compliance with Act 51 of 2009.
7:20 DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PLAN (DROP) - Effective July 1, 2011, a DROP Plan
will be instituted in accordance with the following provisions. Officers eligible to participate in this
Plan are those attaining the age of 52 who have completed 25 or more years of credited service
during the term of this Award. Participation in the DROP Plan is open to the above-eligible
Officers through December 31, 2021.

Section 1: Definitions
DROP - The Deferred Retirement Option Plan created as an optional form of benefit under. the
existing Moon Township Police Pension Fund.
Subsidiary DROP Participant Account - A separate, interest bearing, subsidiary DROP
participant account established to accumulate the DROP pension benefit for a DROP
participant.
Member -A full-time Moon Township Police Officer covered by the Plan.

April 15, 2020

Participant - A Police Officer who is eligible for normal retirement pursuant to the pension plan
and who has elected to participate in the DROP program.
Effective Date of Participation - The day following the effective date of the member's regular
retirement.
Plan - The Moon Township Police Pension Plan as it applies to Moon Township Police Officers.
Section 2: DROP Provisions
(A) Eligibility - Effective July 1, 2011, members of the Moon Township Police Officers'
bargaining unit that have not retired prior to the implementation of the DROP program,
may enter into the DROP on the first day of any month following the attainment of age
52 and the completion of 25 or more years of credited service with the Moon Township
Police Department.
(8) Election Period - Any officer who is eligible to enter the DROP must enroll in the
program no more than sixty (60) calendar days from the day that they became eligible to
enter the DROP. Any officer who fails to enter the DROP within this sixty (60) day
Election Period shall be considered ineligible to enter the DROP.
(C) Written Election - An eligible Member of the Plan electing to participate in the DROP
program must complete and execute a "DROP" Election Form: prepared by Moon
Township, which shall evidence the Member's participation in the DROP program, and
document the Participant's rights and obligations under the DROP. The form must be
signed and notarized by the Member and be submitted to the Township within 30 days of
the date on which the member wishes the DROP election to be effective. The DROP
Election Form shall include an irrevocable notice to the Township that the Member shall
terminate from employment with the Moon Township Police Department effective on a
specific date ("resignation date") no later than thirty-six (36) months from the effective
date of the DROP election. An Officer shall cease work as a Moon Township Police
Officer on the Officer's resignation date, unless the Employer terminates or honorably
discharges the Officer prior to the resignation date. In addition, all retirement documents
required by the Police Pension Plan Administrator must be filed and presented to the
Township for approval of retirement and commencement of the monthly pension
benefits. Once the retirement application has been approved by the Police Pension
Administrator, it shall become irrevocable.
After a member enters the DROP program, contributions to the pension plan by the
Participant and the Township on behalf of the participant will cease, and the amount of
the monthly benefits will be frozen except for any applicable cost-of- living adjustment
(COLA) increase awarded to all pension recipients.
Members shall be advised to consult a Tax Advisor, of their choice, prior to considering
the DROP program, as there may be serious tax implications and/or consequences to
participating in the DROP program.

April 15, 2020

(D) Limitations on Pension Accrual - After the effective date of the DROP election, the
Participant shall no longer earn or accrue additional years of continuous service for
pension purposes.
(E) Benefit Calculations - For all Plan purposes, continuous service of a Member
participating in the DROP program shall remain as it existed on the effective date of
commencement of participation in the DROP program. Service thereafter shall not be
recognized or used for the calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the
Plan. The average monthly compensation of the member for pension calculation
purposes shall remain as it existed on the effective date of commencement of
participation in the DROP program.
(F) Payments to DROP Account - The monthly retirement benefits that would have been
payable had the member elected to cease employment and receive a normal retirement
benefit shall, upon the Member commencing participation in the DROP program, be
credited on the first day of each month into a separate subsidiary DROP participant
ledger account established to track and accumulate the Participant's monthly pension
benefits. This account shall be designated the Subsidiary DROP Participant Account.
The account shall be managed by the Township pursuant to the same fiduciary
obligations and principles applicable to management of the municipal pension plans.
(G) Early Termination - A Participant may change the DROP termination date to an earlier
date and thereby effectuate a complete termination from service. No penalty shall be
imposed for early termination of DROP participation. Participation in the DROP does not
guarantee the DROP participant's employment during the period specified for DROP
participation. It is recognized that the Participant shall not be permitted to make any
withdrawals from the DROP Account until DROP participation has ended.
(H) Payout - Upon the termination date set forth in the Drop Election Form or on such date
as the Participants withdraws or is terminated from the DROP program, if earlier, the
terminating DROP participant, or if deceased, the participant's survivor or named
beneficiary, shall elect a method of receiving payment of the DROP benefits.
Distribution, regardless of the method specified, shall be made within forty-five (45) days
following the actual termination of a Participant's employment with the Moon Township
Police Department. The following options for distribution shall be available to and
selected on the approved form by the Participant, Participant's survivor or beneficiary:
(1) the accumulated balance in the Subsidiary DROP Participant Account shall be paid
to the Participant (of the Participant's survivor or named beneficiary) in a single lumpsum payment less withholding taxes; or (2) as a direct rollover to an eligible retirement
plan as defined in section 402(c) (8) (b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; or, in the
case of an eligible retirement plan that is an individual retirement annuity as described in
section 402 (c) (9) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986. If the Participant, Participant's
survivor or beneficiary fails to elect a method of payment within sixty (60) days after the
Participant's termination date, the Township shall pay the balance as a lump sum.

April 15, 2020

If the participant selects a rollover option, he or she must submit all appropriate
paperwork from the IRA custodian within the required election period.
Following termination of DROP participation, the subsequently paid normal retirement
benefits payable to the Participant, Participant's survivor or the Participant's beneficiary
shall no longer be credited to the DROP Account but shall be distributed monthly
pursuant to normal retirement plan rules.
(I) Disability During DROP - If a Participant becomes eligible for a disability pension
benefit and terminates employment, the monthly normal retirement benefit to the DROP
Participant shall terminate.
(J) Death - If a Participant dies before the DROP Account balance is paid, the Participant's
surviving spouse or beneficiary shall have the same rights as the Participant to withdraw
the DROP Account balance. The monthly benefit credited to the Participant's DROP
Account during a month of the Participant's death shall be the final monthly benefit for
DROP participation. In addition, the DROP Participant's survivor shall be eligible to
receive the retirement system death benefits normally payable in the event of the death
of retired employee.
(K) Eligibility for Other Benefits - In accordance with the provisions of the Act No. 44 of
2009, 53 P.S. §895.1101 - 895.1131, a DROP participant shall be eligible for all preretirement benefits for employees provided by law, including but not limited to the
Workers' Compensation Act, Public Safety Officers' Benefit Act of 1976, etc.
(L) Amendment - Any amendments to the DROP Ordinance shall be consistent with the
provisions covering deferred retirement option plans set forth in any applicable collective
bargaining agreement or state or federal law, and shall be binding upon all future
Participants and upon all Participants who have balance in their DROP Accounts.

Section 3: Effective Date
The Effective Date of the DROP program will be July 1, 2011.

Section 4: Severability
The provisions of this Ordinance shall be severable, and if any of its provisions shall be held to
be unconstitutional or illegal, the validity of any of the remaining provision of this Ordinance shall
not be affected thereby.

April 15, 2020

Section 5: State Laws
This Ordinance has been drafted to comply with the terms and provisions of Act No. 44 of 2009,
53 P.S. §895.1101 - 895.1131. If the event that any such terms are deemed to conflict with the
mandate of Act 44, as it shall be amended from time to time, this Ordinance shall be amended
in order to meet the mandatory compliance so long as the individual legal rights of members
and DROP participants are not adversely affected.

Section 6: Release of Liability and Waiver of Claims
Individuals entering the DROP agree to execute a written release of Moon Township and the
Moon Township Police Association from liability and hereby waive any and all potential claims
against the Township and the Police Association associated with the DROP benefit. It is
expressly understood that the Township is not guaranteeing a specific interest rate during
DROP participation. Subject to the provisions of the Act and unless otherwise specifically
required by other applicable laws, no past, present or future officer or agent of the Employer,
Plan Administrator or Police Association shall be personally liable to any Participant, Beneficiary
or other person under any provision of the DROP. The parties to this Agreement intend to
provide for a DROP which is entirely compliant with applicable law. To the extent there is any
conflict between the provisions of this Agreement and the provisions of the law, said law shall
govern. In the event that any courts in Pennsylvania with jurisdiction over the matter, the
Pennsylvania Auditor General, or other administrative authority having jurisdiction issues a
finding, ruling, regulation, decision or order concerning DROPs in Pennsylvania which is or are
in any way contrary to the provisions contained herein, those provisions shall be amended to
comply with such finding, ruling, regulation, decision or order.

Section 7: Other
A. Upon entering the DROP all accrued clothing and equipment allowance funds in an
Officer's account shall revert to the Township. A Quartermaster system will be
administered by the Chief of Police for the issuance of uniforms and equipment to
officers on the DROP.
B. Officers on the DROP are not eligible for the Long-Term Disability benefit.
C. Time spent on Short Term Disability will not extend the DROP term.
D. Upon entering the DROP the participant must sell back all accrued sick time to the
Township with the exception of up to twenty (20) sick days which the participant may
elect to carry over into the DROP period. Accrued sick time will be bought back by the
Township as enumerated in Section 5:44 (a). The DROP participant will not accrue any
additional sick time while enrolled in the DROP. However, should the participant
exhaust their allotment of sick days they can convert any unused vacation days into sick
days should they become ill or injured and provide documentation from a physician
certifying that they are unable to work due to a medical condition. Otherwise a DROP
participant is eligible for the Short-Term Disability benefit.

April 15, 2020

SECTION 8 RESIDENCY
8:10 The Township will permit its Police Officers to reside up to fifteen (15) air miles from the
office of the Police Chief in the Public Safety Building.
8:20 RESIDENCY/COMMUNITY SERVICE INCENTIVE - Moon Township Police Officers who
contribute to public service projects to the community will be recognized for their efforts and will
receive a one-time bonus stipend per project from the Board of Supervisors. Such public service
fosters a positive working relationship between the Police Department and the community in
which they serve. The type of community service that the Board will consider includes active
leadership roles in community youth athletic programs, community projects that benefit
residents or the environment, or any special program meritorious to the Township. This
monetary stipend shall be initially established at three hundred and seventy-five dollars
($375.00). In addition, those Police Officers who qualify will be recognized at a public meeting of
the Board of Supervisors and will receive a check and plaque from the Chief of Police and
Board of Supervisors to recognize their community service. The purpose of this incentive plan is
to enhance the image of the Police in the Township and to encourage our Police to consider
residency and involvement in Moon Township.

SECTION 9 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
9:10 Grievances are limited to matters involving an alleged violation or misapplication of this
Agreement. Grievances may also be filed for disciplinary actions from a written warning to more
serious actions. Additionally, the parties to this Agreement may litigate through the grievance
procedure any issues that arise under the Heart and Lung Act.
9:11 Verbal warnings will not be grievable.
9:20 STEP 1 - The Officer, either alone or accompanied by a representative of the Bargaining
Unit, or the Bargaining Unit itself, shall present the grievance in writing to the Chief of Police or
his designee within ten (10) days of its alleged occurrence or within ten (10) days of the date its
alleged occurrence should have been known. The ten (10) day limitation period may only be
extended on a case by case basis by a written extension agreement between the Association
and the Township. The Chief shall report his decision in writing to the Officer and the Bargaining
Unit representative within five (5) days of its presentation.

NOTE - For the purpose of deciding disciplinary grievances previously taken by or
approved by the Chief of Police, this step shall not be reviewed again by the Police Chief, and
the Officer or Bargaining Unit will proceed directly with Step 2 immediately.
STEP 2 - In the event the grievance is not settled at Step 1, an appeal must be
presented in writing by the Member or Bargaining Unit representative to the Township Manager
or his designee within five (5) working days after the response at Step 1 is due. The Manager of
the Township or his designated representative shall respond in writing to the Member and the
Bargaining Unit representative within five (5) working days after receipt of the appeal.

April 15, 2020

STEP 3 - As of January 1, 1995 the Board of Supervisors will no longer be included as a
step in the Grievance Procedure. In the event the grievance has not been satisfactorily resolved
in Step 2, the Bargaining Unit representative may initiate an appeal by serving upon the
Township Manager or his designee a notice in writing of its intent to proceed to arbitration within
five (5) working days after receipt of the Step 2 decision is due. The Union must approve
grievances before they proceed to arbitration.
The Arbitrator is to be selected by the parties jointly within seven (7) days after notice
has been given. If the Parties fail to agree on an Arbitrator, either Party may request the Federal
Mediation and Conciliation Service to submit a list of seven (7) possible Arbitrators.
The Parties shall meet within seven (7) working days of the receipt of said list for the
purpose of selecting the Arbitrator by alternately striking one name from the list, until only one
name remains. The parties shall alternate the first strike from grievance arbitration to grievance
arbitration.
The Arbitrator shall neither add to, subtract from, nor modify the provisions of this
Agreement. The Arbitrator shall confine himself to the precise issues submitted for arbitration.
The Arbitrator has no authority to determine issues not submitted to him.
The decision of the Arbitrator shall be binding and final on both Parties. The Arbitrator
shall be requested to issue his decision within thirty (30) days after the hearing or submission of
post hearing briefs.

9:21 For the purposes of the above Grievance Procedure, all days above shall be considered
normal office working days, i.e. Monday - Friday (holidays excluded).
9:22 All of the time limits contained in this article may be extended in writing by mutual
agreement.
9:23 It is recognized that in Steps 1 and 2, the disciplinary matters would not be formalized
hearings. Neither the Township nor the Grievant or Association representative would utilize
legal counsel to present their cases. All decisions, however, would be in writing.
9:24 All fees and expenses of the Arbitrator shall be divided equally between the Parties. Each
Party shall bear the cost of preparing and presenting its own case.
9:25 The Bargaining Unit must receive notice of any grievance filed and must have an
opportunity to appear with the Grievant at all steps of the procedure.
9:30 The Township and Police Bargaining Unit understand that for the purposes of disciplinary
grievances, the definition of "just cause" shall be the appropriate standard for disciplining a
Police Officer as applied through that well-established Pennsylvania case law detailing the
duties and responsibilities of a Police Officer to do his job, to the public, to his department, and
to his fellow Officers. It is agreed that Moon Township should hold its Police Officers to a
standard of conduct no higher than the standard of conduct identified in Pennsylvania case law,
particularly that case law interpreting civil service statutes and requirements which has been

April 15, 2020

applied to other Pennsylvania communities. Further, it is agreed that the standard of conduct to
be applied to Township Police Officers be not less than the traditional standard of conduct
determined by the same body of case law to be applied to its Police Officers.

SECTION 10 OFFICER'S BILL OF RIGHTS
10:10 When an anonymous complaint is made against a Police Officer and no corroborative
evidence is obtained, the complaint shall be classified as unfounded.
10:11 A Police Officer, whether a subject or witness, must be informed of the nature of the
interrogation at the outset of the interrogation.
10:12 If the interrogated Police Officer writes a statement, a transcript is taken, or mechanical
record made, one copy of the same must be given to the interrogated Police Officer, without
cost, upon request.
10:13 If any Police Officer under interrogation is under arrest, he shall be completely informed
of all his rights prior to the commencement of the interrogation.
10:14 At the request of any Police Officer under investigation for possible disciplinary action,
and who is undergoing or about to undergo questioning concerning the matter, he shall have the
right to be represented by a Township Police Association representative who shall be present at
all times during the interrogation. The interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonable time
until representation can be obtained.
10:15 No Officer shall be disciplined without just cause which shall be provided to the Police
Officer and President or an Officer of the Bargaining Unit.
10:16 Discipline reports shall be removed from an officer's file in the following time frames
provided the same conduct is not committed during this time:

Verbal warning/counseling/remediation

order:

One (1) year from the date of discipline.
Written reprimand: Two (2) years from the date of discipline.
Suspension: Five (5) years from the date of discipline.
Reduction in rank: Ten (10) years from the date of discipline.

April 15, 2020

SECTION 11 TERM AND SCOPE OF AGREEMENT

11 :10 This Agreement shall become effective 12:00 a.m. on January 1, 2018 and remain in full
force and effect until 11 :59 p.m. on December 31, 2021.
11:20 PAST PRACTICE AS IS CLAUSE -All existing working conditions, understandings,
benefits, and past practices previously enjoyed by members of the bargaining unit and not
modified specifically by this Agreement shall remain "AS IS".
11:30 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE - The parties hereto agree that in the event any provision of
this Agreement is held to be unlawful or void by any tribunal having the right to so hold, the
remainder of this Agreement shall remain in full force and effect unless the parts so found to be
void are wholly inseparable from the remaining portions of this Agreement.

April 15, 2020

SECTION 12 WITNESS OF AGREEMENT

12:10 In witness whereof, the Parties hereto have duly executed this Agreement on this

rJq/~
ATTEST:

day

of---=Up---=+.......
lq-+-·/
____

, 2.Q.:t-9.~dO

MOON TOWNSHl'l

17

By24~~
Byikf/1,~,
Chairman of the Moon Township
Board of Supervisors

1

WITNESS:

Moon Township Manager

MOON TOWNSHIP POLICE OFFICERS

rt1-A<.,_...,epresentatives
for the Moon Township Police

April 15, 2020

APPENDIX A

Each year during open enrollment, the
Township shall provide the Police Association
Members with that year's Vision Plan information

April 15, 2020

VBA#4002

MEIT BASIC PLAN

ZERO COPAYMENT PROGRAM

Plus Sunglasses

Vision Exam
Lenses
Frames

24 Months
24 Months
24 Months

24 Months
24 Months

VBA Participating Provider

Vision Exam ( For Glasses )
Clear Standard Lenses ( Pair ):
Single Vision
Bifocal
Blended Bifocal
Trifocal
Progressives ....
Lenticular
Polycarbonate•·•
Scratch Coat-1 Yr
Frame"
-ORContacts ( in lieu or all eyeglass benefits
Selected in Lieu of Glasses** ...
Medically Required

12 Months
12 Months
24 Months

Non-Participating

Provider

Amount Covered

Amount Reimbursed

100%

$30.00

100%
100%
100%
100%

$30.00
$40.00
$40.00
$60.00
$60.00
$80.00

Controlled Cost

100%
100%
100%
100%

NIA
NIA

$40.00

listed above )

$100.00
UCR*

$100.00
$250.00

Usual, Customary and Reasonable as determined by VBA
••

Within the program's $50 wholesale allowance ( approximately $125 to $150 retail)
Available In-Network al no charge for children under age 19
Progressive Lenses typically retail from $150 to $400, depending on lens options. VBAs controlled costs generally range from $45 lo $175.
The contact allowance is applied to all seNiceslmaterials associated with contact lenses. This includes, but not limited lo, contact exam, filling,
dispensing, cost of lenses, etc. No guarantee the contact allowance will cover entire contact cost (materialslseNices).

SUNGLASSES: Member only is entitled to one pair of sunglasses (in addition to dress glasses) during a 24 month
period.

All participaling provider locations are available on-line al www.visionbenefils.com, Customer SeNice: 1-800-432-4966

April 15, 2020

>yZ
VisionBenefits
ofAmerica

Vision Benefits of America is designed to cover visual needs rather than cosmetic materials, and
consequently includes some limitations in order to control costs. The following options or services will
generally result in additional charges to the patient or are not covered under the plan.

A patient selecting any of the following items will be responsible for the additional charges, all of which
are monitored and controlled by VBA.
•

Tinted Lenses (only available for Sunglass benefit)

•

Photochromic (only available for Sunglass benefit)

•

Polycarbonate (covered under age 19)
Hi-Index Lenses

•

Progressive (Available starting at $45)

•

The coating of the lens or lenses (Except 1-Yr Scratch Protection)

•

A frame that costs more that the plan allowance

•

Rimless Frames

•

Anti-Reflective/Backside UV/Optifog

Additionally, costs for contact lenses/services in excess of the plan's scheduled reimbursement
allowances are the responsibility of the patient.

The contract gives VBA the right to waive any of the plan limitations if, in the opinion of our optometric
consultants, it is necessary for the patient's welfare. VBA provides no benefit for professional services
or materials connected with the following:
•

Orthoptics or vision training

•

Non-prescription lenses

•

Two pair of glasses in lieu of bifocals

•

Medical or surgical treatment of the eyes

•

Any eye examination, or corrective eyewear, required by an employer as a condition of
employment

•

Services or materials provided as a result of any Worker's Compensation Law or similar

•

Glasses and contacts during the same eligibility period

legislation

Lenses and frames furnished under this program which are lost or broken will not be replaced except at
the normal intervals when services are otherwise available.

300 Weyman Road, Suite 400 Pittsburgh PA 15236 Phone: 1-800-432-4955

Fax: 412-881-7319

www.visianbenefits.com

April 15, 2020

APPENDIX B

Each year during open enrollment, the
Township shall provide the Police Association
Members with that year's Dental Plan information

April 15, 2020

UNITED CONCORDIA
DENTAL
/

/

Dental Benefits Summary for Municipal Benefits Services
Network: Concordia Advantage

Group Number 902962-xxx Hi~h Option
Benefit

Category

,-e1,,I11i1el~J11w,- ... •-·-!J•••·

1

Exams
Bit~\\1~9 ><:rays
-. __ All Other X-rays ---- . ---CJeani,rig~& Fl_uorid~.Treatments
Sealants
·-Palliative Treatment

'@fff,',il]dl:f~~~""

;_

-- - -

.·.""''
~~

Basic Restorative (Fillings)
Simple Extractions
_Space Maintainers _
Repairs of Crowns, Inlays, Onlays
_sn9odontics
Nonsurgical Periodontics
SurgLcal_Per!Qd~'}tici.
C:omplex Oral Surgery
General Anesthesia
lnlavs, Onlavs, Crowns

~:-~?:DHI.-::.
,.~9ilt,r,
':::t~1r,,n;!~r:

1

ln-Network

..

..

,:,,·.·

~~llci~1:J:ili:'fd•.tfiU1'1."l~(;r,::~

.

~·,,,._..~
.,.,..,
~

.;•'--".'".--·--~-

·a~

100%

-

7:!·

·' £:ic.,

100%

.

. •·

;=~.le
'!<>''

100%

-·

·,

.

..

50%

50%
••

Diaonostic, Active, Retention Treatment

~-,

y

,-;:,.

~

50%

•••·<·

-

Pregnancy Benefit
3

2

,,,

.

,@J;JiE,©:IT.U-!irlriJillliFDIGt:ri1.M1ffr!.l0u'r.18TQ11!l

Smile for Health®-Wellness

Non-Network

100%

Repairs of Bridges & Dentures
Prosthetics <Bridaes, Dentures)

.1.ma1rf.:.trrrr:rnmf;<~£Tm

2

-:

·---------

Provides periodontal care for people with cerlain chronic
medical conditions: diabetes, hearl disease, lupus, oral cancer,
organ transplant, rlleumatoid arlhritis and stroke

-

•
•
•
•
•

...

'J.'.:,.

= ,..

~
.
Covers 1 additional cleaning during pregnancy
Covers 1 additional periodontal maintenance
Scaling and root planing
4 eeriodontal surg~_I)'erocedures
Covers 1 additional periodontal maintenance per year and all are
covered at 100%
Scaling and root planing are covered at 100%
4 periodontal surcierv nrocedures are covered at 100%

=-

•
•

~

50%

-

-

·h -

;,

.

,,
'.'f~iltt1luiffii'.0t\0;l,]).r:,HIT1.1'(;l{fJi)~fii;t,"'lr,i·wt.1t.i,,.:iillJitfit;:rr1GJ'lsffi'lt-€0~'C1JlR;iillJiti-S!Gl1!if.'.rirfjf,)ililjJl1~:'s@i.l'ill:t.{;_,m
Annual Program Deductible (per person/per family)
Ann1,1_~1'}\qgra111_M?x§~ (pe'. person)
Lifetime Orthodontic Maximum leer oersonl

None
None
$800

-·

- .

Representattve l1stmgof covered services - cerl1ficate of coverage provides a deta,ted descnpt,on of benefits.
1. Unmarried dependent children covered to age 26.
2. Reimbursement is based on our schedule of maximum allowable charges (MACs). Network dentisls agree lo accepl our allowances as payment in
full ror covered services. Non-network dentists may bill the member for any difference between our allowance and their ree (also known as balance
billing). United Concordia Denial's standard exclusions and limitations apply.
3. Members (subscribers or covered dependents) with certain medical conditions must sign up ror this program through My Dental Benefits on
UnitedConcordla,com.

EEM-0142-0514

UnitedConcordia.com

• 1-800-332-0366

April 15, 2020

ATTACHMENT 1 TO TWELVE HOUR SHIFT
ADDENDUM

April 15, 2020

1

WEEK

f11•:,;, .c !.i..v·I

}Ui, ..,\ .. •pl

·,
1

A

A

0700-1900

0700-1900

13

0700-1900

B

A

A

A

0700-1900

0700-1900

0700-1900

0700-1900

1

WEEK

C

C

D

D

C

C

C

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

B

B

0700-1900

0700-1900

/1.

0700-1900

A

B

B

B

0700-1900

0700-1900

0700-1900

0700-1900

2

WEEK

D

D

C

C

D

D

D

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

C

C

D

D

C

C

C

0700-1900

0700-1900

0700-1900

0700-1900

0700-1900

0700-1900

0700-1900

3

WEEK

A

A

B

B

A

A

A

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

D

D

C

C

D

D

D

0700-1900

0700-1900

0700-1900

0700-1900

0700-1900

0700-1900

0700-1900

4

)>
""CJ

--,

f--'
V,

N

0
N

0

B

B

A

A

B

B

B

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

1900-0700

ATTACHMENT 2 TO TWELVE HOUR SHIFT ADDENDUM

April 15, 2020

-

Week

Week

2

-

Shift

Mon

Tues

Wed

Thurs

Fri

Sat

7A-1P

D-C

B-D

A-D

A-C

8-C

8-D

Sun

I

B-D

I

_!

IP-7P

D-8

8-D

A-C

A-C

8-D

8-D

B-D

?A-IP

8-D

D-8

C-A

C-A

D-8

D-8

D-8

IP-7P

8-D

D-A

C-A

C-8

D-8

D-8

?A-IP

A-D

B-C

8-D

A-D

A-C

B-D

8-D

A-C

A-C

~

J

IP-7P

A-C

A-C
A-C

7A-1P

C-A

C-A

D-B

D-8

C-A

C-A

IP-7P

C-A

C-B

D-B

D-A

C-A

C-A

-·-•

·---·----------

·1

-

-1

i

D-A
C-A

I

C-A

I

A-C
·1

A-B

I

8-A
--;---B-D
IP-7P

D-B

C-B

C-A

D-B

C-A

C-A

7A-1P

8-D

A-C

A-C

7A-1P
Week
3

D-B

1P-7P
?A-IP
Week
4

----

--------

D-8

B-C

C-8

C-A

- --

C-A

C-A

?A-IP

A-C

A-C

IP-7P

A-C

A-D

IP-7P

A-C

i

A-D

-1
I

·;

D-A

D-8

D-B

D-8

D-8

D-B

B-D

B-D

8-D

B-D

B-D
I·

8-C

-,-~A --·
I

D-A
D-B
-- ------------ D-B
D-B

C-B
C-A-

B-D

B-D

A-C

A-C

C-A

B-D

8-C

A-C

A-C

C-D

I

C-A

A-C
A-C

I

CALL OUT INSTRUCTIONS

)>

u

"""\

f--'

V1
N

0
N
0

I
I

-~-

1. FIND Tl-IE WEEK AND DAY OF OT TO BE FILLED. OT WILL BE FILLED IN 6 HR BLOCKS. AN OFFICER MAY ACCEPT BOTH 6 I-IR.BLACKS OF SHIFT IF
THE ROTATION REACHES HIM.
2. NO OFFICER MAY BE ORDERED OUT OR ACCEPT OT IF IT RESULTS IN WORKING 18 SCHEDULED HOURS
3. GO THROUGH THE OT ROTATION FOR THE FIRST CREW LISTED IN THAT BLOCK AND IF NOT FILLED THEN THE SECOND CREW LISTED.
4. IF STILL NOT FILLED, THEN YOU WILL ORDER AN OFFICER OUT ACCORDINGTO ROTATION AND FROM THE FIRST CREW LISTED.

Twelve (12) Hour Work Shift Addendum
to the Agreement between
the Township of Moon and the Moon Township Police Officers

Addendum Agreement between the Township of Moon and the Moon Township Police
Officers' Association in regarding the implementation of the twelve (12) hour shift patrol
schedule. The parties agree to the following addendums to the current working agreement for
the purpose of implementing the twelve (12) hour work schedule. These addendums will
become effective January 10, 2000 and will remain in effect only as long as the twelve (12) hour
shift is utilized by the Moon Township Police patrol unit. These addendums will be null and void
if and when that shift would be abandoned. These addendums are not intended to add to or
subtract from the current benefits and conditions outlined by the current Agreement entered into
by both parties but to modify the specifically listed clauses so as to allow for the implementation
of the twelve (12) hour shift. Any clause not specifically modified and listed in this Addendum
Agreement will remain in effect as delineated in the original Agreement. For the purpose of
identification, the clauses pertaining to the implementation of the twelve (12) hour shift will be
identified with the original clause number followed by: 12. These clauses affect only the patrol
unit police Officers who will work the proposed twelve (12) hour shift schedule. Any police
Officer remaining on an eight (8) hour shift schedule will be governed by the contract as it is
prior to these addendum clauses.
2:10:12 Twelve (12) hours shall constitute a normal day's work and eighty (80) hours a normal
two (2) week's work. Except as set forth in the paragraph below, all work in any one day above
twelve (12) hours shall be paid for at a rate of time and one half (1-1/2) and any work performed
during non-scheduled hours shall be paid for at a rate of time and one half (1-1/2). Since patrol
Officers work an eighty-four (84) hour schedule, patrol Officers shall continue to be paid four (4)
hours scheduled overtime every pay period. A patrol Officer shall not be paid all three, daily,
weekly or scheduled overtime, for the same hours worked.
Vacation days and personal days shall count as actual time worked in determining if
overtime is generated; provided, however, that sick days and compensatory time shall not count
as actual time worked in determining if overtime is generated. For example, if an Officer works a
twelve (12) hour work schedule which would otherwise total more than 80 hours of pay in a two
(2) week pay period, any sick day or compensatory time off used during that period would not
count as hours worked in calculating overtime. Therefore, any other provision of this Agreement
notwithstanding, pay for hours beyond 80 hours in that pay period would instead be calculated
as straight time and not overtime until the Officer actually works more than eighty
(80 hours in that pay period.
As has been accepted practice, the Chief of Police shall retain the discretion to offer a
patrol Officer leave in lieu of overtime, when the Officer is engaged in Officer Requested
Training, Voluntary Periodic Team Training (i.e. C.I.R.T. etc.), and Instructor/Specialist Training

April 15, 2020

and Re-Certifications. Agreements between the Chief of Police and patrol Officers may be also
made to address situations not covered above (i.e. D.A.R.E., Mock Crash, etc.)
A day is a continuous twenty-four (24) hour period beginning at the regular starting time
of a Policeman's shift of either 0700 hours or 0730 hours. A two (2) work week period is a
fourteen (14) consecutive day period beginning at either 0700 hours or 0730 hours (according to
the Officer's scheduled shift) on the first Monday of the pay period and ending two Mondays
later at either 0700 hours or 0730 hours respectively.
The scheduled shifts shall be as outlined in the attached schedule (Attachment 1 to this
Addendum) except that a portion of each crew will start and end their shift one half (1/2) hour
later as shown on the schedule to assure that there is police available during all hours.
2:20:12 Overtime shall be determined by seniority and crew rotation as outlined in the attached
schedule entitled "Call Out Master Sheet" (Attachment 2 to this Addendum). All crews will be
offered the overtime based upon the seniority of the members of the crew with the most senior
man first being offered, and the next most senior man in the crew being offered. Any Officer who
refuses overtime will not be again offered overtime until the overtime has been offered to all
other members of the crew. The rotation will continue as above. The shift commander will keep
a list available to his crew to assure compliance with the above provisions. The Chief of Police
or his designee shall be responsible for seeing that all crews are adequately staffed and shall
have the authority to direct any available Officer to work overtime if he deems it necessary.
5:12:12 SPECIAL COURT COMPENSATORY TIME PROVISION: In the event a Police Officer
works a schedule 7:00 p.m. or 7:30 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. or 7:30 a.m. shift and the Officer is
scheduled to return to work that same shift later in the day that he finished the prior shift, and
within two (2) hours of the end of the first shift the Officer must attend court: the following
compensatory time guidelines will be followed:
If the Officer attends court for four (4) to five (5) hours the Officer will have the option of
converting those hours to compensatory time and using six (6) of those hours to take off the first
half of the schedule work shift which is to start that same day.
If the Officer attends court for anything greater than five (5) hours the Officer shall
convert those hours to compensatory time and use six (6) of those hours to take off the first half
of the schedule work shift which is to start that same day.
5:20:12 PERSONAL DAYS: Each Officer with six (6) months of service will annually be granted
three (3) 12-hour personal days of leave with pay. Up to one (1) unused personal day may be
carried over to the next calendar year for use during that year.

April 15, 2020

5:30:12 FAMILY DEATH LEAVE: In the event the officer attends the funeral, The Township
shall allow an Officer up to three (3) 12 hour regularly scheduled working days leave with pay in
the event of the death of the Officer's spouse, child, parent, brother, sister, father-in-law,
mother-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, grandmother or grandfather provided the Officer
attends the funeral.
5:41 :12 Sick days will accumulate at a rate of one (1) twelve (12) hour day per month until a
total of ten (10) twelve (12) hour days per year is reached and will accumulate to a maximum of
eighty (80) twelve (12) hour days; however, all ten (10) will be available for use at the first of
January.

An Officer hired prior to July 24, 2015 who would terminate his service with the
Township during the course of any year would only be eligible to buy back sick days that had
accrued to the point of termination. Officers hired on or after July 24, 2015 shall not be eligible
to sell unused accumulated sick days back to the Township.
Any Officer who does not use any Sick Days in a calendar year will be given one (1)
additional Personal Day for use in the following calendar year.
Sick time in increments of less than twelve (12) hours will not be available unless the
Officer becomes ill on duty.

5:42:12 For Officers hired prior to July 24, 2015, the Township shall buy back a maximum of ten
(10) 12-hour sick days per year per Officer except at the termination of an Officer's services for
retirement or death of the Officer when the entire total of accumulated sick days will be eligible
for buy back. Officers hired on or after July 24, 2015 shall not be eligible to sell unused
accumulated sick days back to the Township.
5:43:12 The Township will buy back sick days at a rate of one hundred twelve dollars and fifty
cents ($112.50)fortwelve (12) hour shifts.

Holidays for the Twelve-Hour Shift

5:50:12 PAID HOLIDAYS: The following days will be considered Holidays for Officers working
the twelve (12) hour shift schedule: New Year's Day, Good Friday, Memorial Day,
Independence Day (July 4th), Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, Veteran's Day, and Christmas
Day. Holidays not noted as being observed on a specific date will be observed on the date
legally observed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (Total of 8)

April 15, 2020

5:51 :12 An Officer who works on a Holiday shall receive for each such Holiday worked, total
compensation for such work at two and one-half (2-1/2) times his regular hourly rate. For the
first twelve (12) hours of the Holiday, the Officer shall receive one and one-half (1-1/2) his hourly
rate for each hour worked which is to be paid in the pay period the Holiday was worked. The
additional twelve (12) hours straight time will be titled Holiday Pay and will be compensated as
described in Section 5:54: 12. All hours over the initial twelve (12) will be compensated at two
and one-half (2-1/2) the Officers hourly rate and paid in the pay period the additional hours were
worked.
5:52:12 An Officer whose regularly scheduled day off shall fall on a Holiday shall receive twelve
(12) hours pay at his straight time rate for that Holiday treated as Holiday Pay as described in
Section 5:54: 12, or an additional paid day off, the option to be determined at the mutual consent
of the Township and the Officer.
5:53:12 If any Holiday shall fall within an Officer's vacation, the Officer's vacation allowance
shall be charged for each scheduled workday used and he shall receive twelve hours (12) pay
for each vacation day charged in the pay period the vacation was taken. The Officer shall
receive twelve (12) hours straight time for that Holiday at the time noted in Section 5:54.
5:54:12 Holiday Pay shall be paid by the Township in one lump sum, between the last payday in
November and the first payday in December, except for Holidays actually enjoyed as paid days
off in lieu of Holiday Pay.
5:60:12 VACATION: Police Officers shall be entitled to annual paid vacation based on the
following schedule:

More
More
More
More
More
More
More
More
More
More

than
than
than
than
than
than
than
than
than
than

1 year of service
3 years of service
6 years of service
8 years of service
10 years of service
11 years of service
14 years of service
16 years of service
20 years of service
23 years of service

06 working
07 working
10 working
11 working
12 working
13 working
14 working
15 working
16 working
17 working

days
days
days
days
days
days
days
days
days
days

April 15, 2020

5:66:12 VACATION SELECTION: The following will be the method for vacation selection for
officers assigned to a 12 Hour Shift: Vacation will be selected on each crew first by the
Sergeant, then Corporal, then by each Officer by seniority, with the most senior officer selecting
first.
•
•
•

Round 1 (January 1 to January 31) - Officers will select up to seven (7) vacation days.
Round 2 (February 1 to February 15) - Officers will select up to five (5) additional
vacation days.
Beginning February 16th of each year, vacation days will be granted on a first come, first
serve basis without regard to seniority.

In addition, the following administrative guidelines have been agreed upon: Overtime will be
offered in six-hour increments.
As a routine practice Officers will not work special details i.e. directing traffic, etc. between
working two (2) twelve (12) hours shifts with only one (1) twelve (12) hour off period between
the two (2) shifts.
The first six (6) hours or the second (2nd) six (6) hours of a shift will be permitted to be taken
off with the use of one half (1-1/2) of personal day or six (6) hours of compensatory time.
Personal and compensatory time are subject to the same regulations as are currently in effect
for the eight (8) hour shift.
On one (1) twelve (12) hour shift an Officer will be permitted three (3) fifteen (15) minute
breaks and one (1) forty-five (45) minute meal period. As is current practice the Officer could be
called from the breaks or meal period for emergency situations.
The Officers listed as the primary crew on the "Call Out Master Sheet" will be subject to
being ordered out if necessary, to fill the minimum manpower for any particular shift.
Holidays will be observed as the actual hours of that holiday for the purpose of holiday pay
i.e. 12:00 a.m. to 11 :59 p.m.

April 15, 2020

