AGREEMENT 
Agreement between the Borough ofPlum ofthe County ofAllegheny, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the Police Department ofBorough ofPlum, of the County of Allegheny, Commonwealth ofPennsylvania for the period commencing January 1, 2018 and ending December 31, 2022. 
WITNESS ETH 
SECTION 1. DEFINITIONS: 
The following definitions shall apply to this Agreement: 
A. The term "police officer" as used in this Agreement shall include all persons employed as a regular permanent, full-time police officer, excluding the ChiefofPolice, so long as the persons have been employed through the procedures established in conformity with the Police Civil Service Act. 
B. The term "probationary police officer" as used in the Agreement shall mean those officers who have not completed one year ofservice. Probationary police officers are entitled to all benefits granted under this Agreement unless otherwise noted in this Agreement. 
C. The term "Borough" as used in this Agreement shall mean the Borough of Plum, the Council and the Mayor duly elected under the laws ofthe Commonwealth ofPennsylvania. 
D. Nothing contained in this Agreement shall be construed to effect the provisions oflaw regarding appointment, suspension, reduction, and discharge of a police officer as found in the provisions ofthe Police Civil Service Act. 
SECTION 2. HOURS OF WORK AND OVERTIME SHIFT ASSIGNMENT: 
All police officers shall work eight (8) consecutive hours, which shall constitute a 
day's work and forty (40) hours, which shall constitute a workweek. All assigned 
shifts shall have a minimum of 16 hours between shifts with consecutive days off. 
All police officers shall receive pay at the rate oftime and one-half(1 ½) for all 
time spent in excess ofeight (8) hours per day, forty ( 40) per week, and assigned 
shift with less than 16 hours between shifts. The only exception to the 16 hours 
between shifts will be on normal monthly change over day. The Mayor ofPlum 
Borough shall have the right to vary shift assignments. However, shift 
assignments shall not be made under any circumstances for disciplinary or 
discriminatory purposes. Regular police officers shall be chosen for all overtime 
work on a rotating basis. The Borough, however reserves the right to determine the appropriate personnel for special details, regardless ofseniority rotation. Special details being defined as those special police details which do not fall within the normal parameters ofthe daily police obligations. Any police officer who is called out to work overtime, other than an early start for his shift, shall be guaranteed a minimum pay offour (4) hours at time and one half. 
If a police officer is working a holiday shift in an overtime capacity, he shall receive double time and one-half for the shift/hours worked. This payment is in addition to holiday pay. 
The following examples are provided to clarify the payment of holiday pay and overtime pay on holidays. 
1. 
An officer scheduled to work a holiday as part of his regular shift will receive eight (8) hours ofholiday pay in addition to eight (8) hours ofpay for the shift at the rate oftime and a half. 

2. 
An officer called out on a holiday to work overtime or required to work in an overtime capacity beyond the regular eight (8) hour shift, will receive, in addition to the holiday pay, double time and a halffor overtime hours worked. 

3. 
An officer who is on a regular scheduled day offon the holiday will receive eight (8) hours ofholiday pay for the holiday. 


SECTION 3. HOLIDAYS: 
All full time regular police officers shall be entitled to twelve (12) paid holidays in 
addition to the basic wage, which are: 
NEW YEAR'S DAY PRESIDENT'S DAY GOOD FRIDAY EASTER MEMORIAL DAY (Federal Holiday Date) FLAG DAY INDEPENDENCE DAY LABOR DAY VETERAN'S DAY THANKSGIVING CHRISTMAS OFFICER'S BIRTHDAY 
Holiday pay is eight (8) hours ofpay at the daylight shift rate. In the event any police officer is scheduled to work any of the aforesaid holidays, he shall receive holiday pay, 
plus time and one-half( 1-½) for the hours worked. The holiday shall be considered the calendar day ofthe holiday and not any other day on which the holiday is observed. 
Probationary officers will receive holiday pay for any ofthe aforesaid holidays which occur sixty (60) days after their date ofhire. 
SECTION 4. WAGES: 
A. FULL-TIME WAGE RATES 
Position  2018  2019  2020  2021  2022  
Lieutenant  $94,206.83  $96,562.00  $98,976.05  $101,450.45  $103,986.71  
Patrol Sgt.  $90,038.63  $92,289.60  $94,596.84  $96,961.76  $99,385.81  
Juvenile Ofc.  $87,537.17  $89,725.60  $91,968.74  $94,267.96  $96,624.66  
Detective  $87,537.17  $89,725.60  $91,968.74  $94,267.96  $96,624.66  
Patrol Officer $83,368.99  $85,453.21  $87,589.55  $89,779.28  $92,023.77  

A police officer who has fulfilled the time requirement as set forth for 
newly hired police officers is entitled to the full-time rate. 
The Borough agrees to maintain a 5% pay differential between the ranks ofpatrol officer and JO/Detective, an 8% pay differential between the ranks ofpatrol officer and patrol sergeant, and a 13% pay differential between the ranks ofpatrol officer and lieutenant. 
B. NEWLY HIRED OFFICERS 
Step 1 0-12 months ofservice = 65% of full-time wage rate 
Step 2 13-24 months ofservice= 70% of full-time wage rate 
Step 3 25-36 months ofservice = 80% offull-time wage rate 
Step 4 3 7-48 months ofservice = 90% offull-time wage rate 
After 48 months ofservice= 100% offull-time wage rate 
The step range percentage rate is to be adjusted accordingly with the annual wage (January 1st ofeach year ofthe contract). Example: An officer is hired in June 1997 -On January 1, 1998, his salary will be adjusted to 65% ofthe new 1998 full-time base wage rate. 
The wage increase wi II take effect on the police officer's date ofhire anniversary date. 
C. All compensation earned will be paid on a bi-weekly period as long as all Unionized Borough employees are paid on a bi-weekly basis. Otherwise, wages will be paid on a weekly basis. 
D. Officer-in-Charge (OIC): In the event that a Patrol Sergeant is absent from a shift and not replaced with another Sergeant, the most senior patrol officer working shall be designated OIC. The OIC's pay shall be increased by five percent (5%) for all hours worked in the absence of the Patrol Sergeant. The OIC shall be responsible for providing shift coordination in the absence ofsaid Patrol Sergeant, serving as the point of contact with 911, notifying the ChiefofPolice in the event of emergencies, providing direction to the other patrol officers on shift, etc. 
SECTION 5. SHIFT DIFFERENTIAL: 
A shift differential shall be paid to each police officer working the following shifts. 
Shift Differential 
2:30 P.M. -I 0:30 P.M. 6% of Salary I 0:30 P.M. -6:30 A.M. 7% of Salary 
6:30 A.M. -2:30 P.M. None 
SECTION 6. TIME SPENT IN COURT: 
A. COURT: Ifa police officer is required to appear in any court pursuant to his duties, he shall be paid at time and one half(!-½), with a minimum of three (3) hours, at the first shift rate, ifoff-duty. Ifon-duty, no additional payment shall be made. Ifan officer is required to appear in any court duties while on midnight shift, the officer may elect to take the prior midnight shift off. The court appearance will take the place ofthe officer's assigned shift. Officers can only use midnight court option ifit does not create overtime. Ifan overtime shift is created after the officer has taken the court option, it shall not negate the original approved request. 
B. DISTRICT JUSTICE HEARINGS: In the event that any police officer is required to appear in a district justice court pursuant to his duties, he shall be paid at time and one-half (I-½) with a minimum ofthree (3) hours, at the first rate, ifoff-duty. Ifon-duty, no additional payment shall be made. 
C. WITNESS FEES: In addition to the above, the police officer shall be entitled to retain all witness fees. 
SECTION 7. LONGEVITY: 
Effective January 1, 2000 officers shall receive 1 % ofbase pay after the completion of five ( 5) years of service, with an additional 2/ l 0th of l % for each year thereafter, with a maximum longevity payment of4%. 
Officers hired on or after January 1, 2011 shall receive an annual longevity bonus in 
accordance with the following years ofservice schedule:  
Complete Years ofService  Annual Bonus  
After 5 Years ofService  $500  
After l OYears ofService  $750  
After 15 Years of Service  $1 ,000  
After 20 Years ofService  $1,500  
SECTION 8.  UNIFORM ALLOWANCE:  

Each officer will receive an annual uniform allowance, payable by January 31 st , in the amount of$825. 
Such uniform allowance is to cover the cost ofuniform purchases and cleaning. 
Newly hired patrolmen will be provided with a full uniform complement up to the stated uniform allowance provided to regular officers. 
In the event the Police department implements a change in uniform and/or equipment styles, the Police Officers shall be required to make the necessary purchases for the purpose ofcomplying with such uniform and/or equipment styles. In the event compliance with any such change would exceed fifty percent ofthe annual uniform allowance, and provided further that the Borough does not permit officers to delay the purchase ofsaid uniforms and/or equipment until such time that current uniforms and equipment need replaced, then the Borough shall be required to make a one time reimbursement up to $1200 per officer, for the purpose ofpolice officers complying with the change in uniform and/or equipment styles. 
Body armor will be supplied by the Borough for all new hires. Henceforth, all officers with existing body armor, purchased by the Borough, will be replaced within the warranty period advised by the manufacturer. 
SECTION 9. VACATIONS, PERSONAL DAYS AND MATERNITY LEA VE: 
A. Each police officer shall be entitled to an annual vacation in accordance with the following schedule. 
After One Year Five Days After Two Years Ten Days After Five Years Fifteen Days After Ten Years Twenty Days After Fifteen Years Twenty-Five Days 
For vacation purposes, there shall be two officers permitted to go on 
vacation per shift as long as it does not create a manpower shortage. 
All vacations shall be posted by April 1. Vacations shall be granted on the basis ofseniority. No police officer shall be permitted to take more than one-halfofhis vacation on the first round and after each police officer has elected his vacation period on the first round, a second round shall begin. The second round shall be completed by April lofthe year in question. If a police officer fails to post all of his vacation by April l, seniority shall not apply and vacation shall be taken when available. 
Any recognized holiday that falls during a vacation period shall not be 
counted as part of the police officer's vacation. 
There will be no sell-back ofvacation. This does not apply, however, to reimbursement ofremaining vacation days not used when an officer terminates his employment. 
B. Personal Days-Each police officer shall be entitled to four (4) personal days per year. Prior approval is not required. An officer electing to take a personal day shall notify the shift supervisor at least two (2) hours prior to the beginning ofthe shift. 
Probationary Police Officers -Upon completion ofthe probationary period, a police officer will be entitled to personal days at the rate afforded regular officers. 
C. Maternity/Paternity Leave -Borough police officers shall be entitled to two (2) days ofpaid maternity/paternity leave in the case ofadoption or birth oftheir children in addition to the rights and benefits afforded under applicable laws. 
SECTION I 0. HOSPITALIZATION AND HEAL TH BENEFITS: 
A. HOSPITALIZATION/MAJOR MEDICAL 
The Borough shall provide each police officer and their dependents with 
Highmark High Deductible 1500/3000 health insurance plan, as is offered 
by the carrier. Beginning on January 1, 2012 and on each l st day of 
January thereafter during the term ofthis collective bargaining agreement, 
the Borough will deposit the total annual deductible amount into each 
officer's Health Savings Account. The deductible amount deposited will 
be dictated by the level of healthcare coverage provided to the officer. Thereafter, throughout the year, pro-rata payroll deductions will be withheld from each officer's salary equaling, fifty percent (50%) of the annual deductible amount for the type ofhealth insurance coverage received by the officer, and pre-paid by the employer. 
EXAMPLE: The annual deductible amount for an officer with family coverage is $3,000. The Borough pays the total $3,000 deductible amount into a Health Savings Account on January I st• The officer is thereafter responsible for paying fifty percent (50%) of the total deductible amount, or $1,500, back to the Borough throughout the year through pro-rata payroll deductions. 
Effective January 1, 2009 all active full time officers shall be required to pay fifteen percent (15%) ofthe annual increase in the cost of health care coverage over calendar year 2008. 
The Borough shall retain the right to change existing medical, surgical and hospitalization insurance to a plan which is "comparable" to the coverage which is presently being provided. The Union, however, retains the right to grieve the Borough's determination that a plan is "comparable." If the Union does not agree that a Plan selected by the Borough is "comparable" it will so state, in writing, to the Borough within fourteen (14) calendar days ofbeing provided the plan. In that event, the Borough may not unilaterally implement the proposed new plan, however, it may immediately process the dispute before a neutral arbitrator selected pursuant to the arbitration step ofthe grievance procedure. The decision ofthe arbitrator on this comparable issue shall be issued within forty-five 
(45) calendar days ofthe Union's written notice contesting that the plan selected by the Borough is "comparable" and shall be final and binding and will determine ifthe Borough is authorized to implement the new 
plan. 
The Borough agrees to reimburse the following amounts to all qualifying employees as incentive for utilizing other available health insurance for dependents or for their own health coverage. 
*$400 per month for officers choosing no medical care, dental or vision coverage from the Borough regardless of marital status or number ofdependents. Officers choosing no medical coverage but electing to have the Borough provide coverage for dental and/or vision benefits are responsible for that portion of the selected coverage ( e.g. an officer electing to forgo the Borough's medical coverage BUT desiring either or both dental or vision coverage would 
7 
receive $400 per month LESS the monthly cost for the selected additional coverage). 
*$150 per month for officers with spouse and dependent children choosing only individual coverage with the Borough. 
*$100 per month for officers with spouse and dependent children choosing officer and child coverage with the Borough. 
*$100 per month for officers with spouse and no dependent children choosing only individual coverage with the Borough. 
*$75 per month for officers with no spouse but with dependent children choosing only individual coverage with the Borough. 
The officer may elect to receive a lump sum payment, in advance, for a one year commitment for the reduced coverage, or receive the incentive payments on a monthly basis. Officers agree to provide the Borough with updated records ofmarital status and dependent children as these conditions change. 
B. DENTAL/OPTICAL PLANS 
The Borough shall provide a high option family or single coverage Dental Program under the M.E.I.T. Program and an Optical Plan. 
The Borough agrees to reimburse the following amounts to all qualifying 
employees as incentive for utilizing only single coverage for dental and 
optical insurance. 
*$25 per month for officers with a spouse and/or dependent children who choose only individual coverage with the Borough. 
The officer may elect to receive a lump sum payment, in advance, for a 
one-year commitment for the reduced coverage, or receive the incentive 
payments on a monthly basis. Officers agree to provide the Borough with 
updated records ofmartial status and dependent children as these 
conditions change. 
C. HOSPITALIZATION/MAJOR MEDICAL BENEFITS FOR RETIREES 
8 
1. All officers hired prior to January 1, 2004, upon reaching normal retirement age (i.e. 25 years ofservice and age 50) are eligible to participate in the Borough group health insurance, or substantially similar, plan coverage for the retiree and spouse with the conditions outlined in this Agreement. The terms ofthis post­retirement Health Care Benefit cannot be altered or negotiated for all officer hired prior to January 1, 2004. No coverage will be provided for dependent children. No coverage will be provided for spouses not ofrecord at the time ofretirement. All officers hired on or after January 1, 2004, upon reaching normal retirement age, are eligible to participate in the Borough group health insurance, or substantially similar, plan coverage for the retiree only, subject to the same conditions outlined elsewhere in the Agreement. 
A. The cost ofthe premium will be paid in accordance with the following formula: 
During the first full year ofretirement, the Borough will 
pay 70% ofthe premium and the retiree will pay 30% of 
the premium. 
During the second full year ofretirement, the Borough will pay 80% ofthe premium and the retiree will pay 20% of the premium. 
During the third full year ofretirement and each year 
thereafter until retiree reaches age 65, the Borough will pay 
90% of the premium and the retiree will pay 10% ofthe 
premmm. 
B. Effective January I, 2004, upon retirement, a retiree may opt to have the Borough provide post-retirement medical coverage pursuant to the existing collective bargaining agreement or, in lieu ofreceiving post-retirement medical coverage, the retiree may opt to receive a monthly payment from the Borough. The Borough agrees to reimburse, by separate monthly check, the following amounts to all qualifying retirees as incentive for utilizing other available health insurance. 
*$200 for a retiree with a spouse who chooses not to use Borough coverage. 
*$150 for a retiree with a spouse who chooses only single coverage with the Borough. 
*$100 for a retiree with no spouse who chooses not to use Borough coverage. 
Retirees agree to provide the Borough with updated records of 
marital status as these conditions change. 
C. Participation in this coverage will only be made available to those retirees who do not have coverage through other employment or through the retiree's spouse. If, at any time, coverage provided under another plan is terminated, the retiree will be permitted to join the Borough's plan at the applicable scale. 
D. The Borough will notify the retiree ofthe premium due. The retiree will be required to pay their share of the premium by the first of each month. The Borough reserves the right to terminate coverage for non-payment of the premium. Ifpayment is not received within fifteen (15) days ofthe due date, the Borough will notify the retiree via certified mail. The retiree then has fifteen 
(15) days to pay the amount due. 
E. Coverage will cease with the death ofthe retiree. 
2. Upon reaching age 65, retired police officers eligible for Medicare or its equivalent, and their spouse, are eligible to participate in medical coverage, at a total cost to the Borough, in a Blue Cross/Blue Shield "65 Special" Plan or substantially similar coverage. This "65 Special" Plan or substantially similar coverage shall provide for all necessary supplements and coverage so as to provide for similar coverage the retired police officer enjoyed while he was actively working for the Borough. 
Ifpermitted by the insurance carrier, the surviving spouse of a 
retiree who retired under the provisions ofthe Agreement shall be 
permitted to continue under the Borough group hospitalization plan 
ifthe spouse pays the premium with the intent being that the 
Borough will not incur any expenses as a result ofthis provision. 
3. Hospitalization/Major Medical Benefits for Retirees shall not be provided to any officer hired on or after January 1, 2011 . 
D. LONG-TERM DISABILITY COVERAGE 
The Borough shall provide long-term disability coverage for all police officers disabled, under the terms of the insurance carrier's policy, for a period longer than 180 calendar days, with policy limits. 
1. The Borough will include the police officers in the plan currently provided for administrative employees, underwritten by Life Insurance Company ofNorth America (CIGNA) or substantially similar coverage which is not Life Insurance Company ofNorth America (CIGNA). A copy ofthe same has been provided to the 

Police Bargaining Unit. 
For officers hired before January 1, 2011: the monthly benefit is 66 ½ ofthe officer's full-time base rate plus maximum longevity pay (currently 4%), regardless ofservice time. 
For officers hired after January 1, 2011: the monthly benefit is 66 2/3 ofthe officer's full-time base rate plus the applicable level of 
longevity pursuant to Section 7 ofthis CBA. 
E. PROBATIONARY OFFICERS 
Blue Cross/Blue Shield or HMO coverage, vision, dental, life and disability coverage will be provided to probationary officers sixty (60) days after employment. During the first sixty (60) days ofemployment, officers may elect to join the Borough Group Plan for Blue Cross/Blue Shield or HMO ifthey pay 100% ofthe applicable premium. 
SECTION 11. SICK LEAVE: 
A. General: Sick Leave with pay shall be granted as prescribed herein for the following reasons: 
a. 
Physical incapacity not incurred in the line ofduty. 

b. 
Personal illness. 


Only regular full-time police officers shall be eligible for sick leave. Employees not listed herein shall be ineligible for sick leave. Probationary Officers shall be entitled to five (5) sick days to use during their initial first year, however, those days are not subject to accumulation. 
B. Sick Leave Allowance and Administration: Sick leave shall be administered in the following manner: 
Officers hired prior to January 1, 2011 shall earn and accrue fifteen (15) 
days sick leave per year after one (1) year ofservice, which may be 
accumulated up to one hundred (100) days plus fifteen (15) days annually. 
If, as ofDecember 3is1 ofthe given year, a police officer's accumulation is 
above one hundred (100) days, the following example shall apply: he has one hundred fifteen (115) days, those fifteen ( 15) days above the one hundred (100) shall be purchased by the Borough at the percentage rate of their value and wage rate at the time ofsell-back to the Borough. 
The then returns the number of accumulated sick days back to the one hundred (100) days agreed upon by the Borough and Police Department. Therefore, at any given time, the number of total sick days will be one hundred fifteen ( 115) (100 accumulated plus 15 annual days). 
After the accumulation ofone hundred (100) days, any part of the additional fifteen (15) sick days not used will be paid at the rate specified as a percent ofa day's pay at the end of the calendar year. 
Sick Leave Accumulation: Upon retirement, termination or a police 
officer's death, each police officer or beneficiary, shall receive the rate 
specified as a percent of the regular rate ofpay at this time for all unused 
sick days which have been accumulated plus annual sick days to the date 
ofretirement, termination or death. 
The specified buy back rates for sick leave sell back shall be seventy-five percent (75%). 
Sick time reimbursement will be made by separate check. 
Any police officer who has lost time due to a service-connected illness or injury is entitled to receive such compensation as is provided by law, preserving to the Borough any right ofsubrogation it may have. 
C. Officers hired on or after January 1, 2011 shall earn and accrue sick leave accordingly: Officers shall be granted ten (10) days sick leave annually after one ( 1) year ofservice. Officers may accrue up to one-hundred ( 100) sick leave days. Any sick leave days accrued above one-hundred (100) days shall expire. All accrued sick-leave days shall expire upon retirement, termination or a police officer's death. 
D. The Employer reserves the right to require a physician's certification of illness or injury as a condition ofpaid sick leave for any officer who is off work due to a sickness or injury for three (3) or more consecutive days, or whenever there is a reasonable basis to believe that an employee is abusing the provisions ofthe sick leave article. A reasonable basis shall include, but not be limited to: a consistent pattern ofsick leave usage on the days immediately before or after scheduled days off; a consistent pattern ofsick leave usage on weekends ofscheduled shifts; the intermittent usage ofsick leave exceeding three days over a thirty (30) day period for two or more consecutive months; unexplained reports ofbeing 
seen in public while on sick leave; and other similar examples ofpotential abuse. 

Officers shall be permitted to utilize sick leave in minimum increments of one (l) hour. 
All officers agree to sign the Borough "sick time verification form" for 
each occurrence ofsick time usage. 
G. SALARY CONTINUANCE PLAN: 
Police Officers are covered by the Salary Continuance Plan on the date they begin work. Ifan officer becomes disabled to the extent he is unable to perform the duties ofhis job for over five ( 5) consecutive work days, he will be eligible for Salary Continuance payments from the Borough, retroactive to the first day ofabsence. In order to receive payments, the officer must be under the care ofa legally qualified physician for the period that Salary Continuance payments are made, and shall be required to submit evidence to that effect. 
The Salary Continuance plan does not apply in cases ofwork related injuries wherein the officer is covered by the terms and provisions ofthe Pennsylvania Heart and Lung Act, Workers' Compensation Act and/or the disability pension provisions ofthe police pension plan. 
The amount ofSalary Continuance payments is determined by the officer's salary* in effect on the date the disability begins and the officer's service as ofthat date. Payments shall be made according to the following 
schedule: 
Years of Full Two-Thirds Continuous Service Salary (2/3 Salary) 
Up to 1 Year 2 Weeks 2 Weeks 1 to 3 Years 1 Month** 5 Months 3 to 5 Years 2 Months 4 Months 5 to 10 Years 3 Months 3 Months 1 0 to 15 Years 4 Months 2 Months 15 to 20 Years 5 Months 1 Month 20 Years & Over 6 Months 0 Months 
* Salary -The Officer' s current base salary. ** Month -Two (2) bi-weekly pay periods. 
In all cases, benefits terminate the month following the officer's 70th 
birthday, or the month preceding the officer's retirement date, if sooner. 
Ifthe officer's disability continues beyond six (6) months, the officer may be eligible for Long Term Disability Insurance payments. 
PERIODS OF DISABILITY: 
A period ofdisability is the total number ofconsecutive days that the 
officer is disabled, beginning with the first scheduled work day. 
Ifthe officer returns to work after receiving Salary Continuance payments and again becomes disabled from the same or related causes, the subsequent absence(s) will be considered the same period ofdisability unless the absences are separated by at least 180 calendar days, beginning the first day the officer returns to work. Ifthe officer becomes disabled from unrelated causes after having received Salary Continuance payments, his subsequent absence will be considered the same period ofdisability unless separated by a return to work. The Borough shall have the right to have its doctor examine the officer and/or medical records to determine whether an absence is due to the same or related cause. 
MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS: 
The Borough reserves the right to require, from time to time, an officer to 
be examined by a legally qualified physician, selected by the Borough, to 
certify that the officer is disabled and unable to perform the duties ofhis 
occupation. 
If there is disagreement between the officer's physician and the Borough selected physician, based on either the medical information submitted or on the results ofthe medical examinations, as to whether or not the officer is disabled and unable to perform the duties ofhis occupation, the qu~stion ofentitlement to benefits shall be decided by grievance arbitration (under the terms ofhis CBA) or any other method mutually agreed upon by the parties. 
VACATION PERIODS: 
Officers may elect to take any vacation to which they are entitled in lieu of receiving Salary Continuation payments. This has the effect ofextending the period the officer receives full salary, but in no case will the combined duration ofvacation and Salary Continuance exceed six (6) months. In addition, vacation in lieu ofSalary Continuance will not affect the requirement that an officer be disabled for the required period prior to receiving Long Term Disability benefits, provided that other plan 
provisions are satisfied. 
It is expressly understood, however, that an officer' s use ofvacation prior to beginning Salary Continuation leave, or later in the year after returning from Salary Continuation leave, will not affect the officer's entitlement to up to the full amount ofpayments as set forth in the above chart. 
REDUCTION BECAUSE OF OTHER BENEFITS: 
Disability Benefits 
Salary Continuation payments will be reduced by disability benefits the officer receives or is eligible to receive from: 
• 
Any State or Federal government plan, either foreign or domestic ( excluding those payments received because ofmilitary service); 

• 
Federal Social Security, payable to the officer. The officer shall be required to make application for Social Security disability benefits and the necessary forms will be sent by the Finance Department during the fifth month ofthe officer's disability. Ifthe initial request for Social Security disability is disallowed, the officer is required to appeal that decision. Ifbenefits are disallowed in the appeal, the officer is required to request a hearing; 

• 
Rehabilitative Employment -Fifty percent (50%) ofthe gross earnings from approved rehabilitative employment, provided that the combined income from Salary Continuance benefits and rehabilitative employment does not exceed the officer's Salary at the time disability began; 

• 
State Disability Funds -Reductions vary under state law, usually in relation to the extent that the state plan is financed by employee contributions and any limitations imposed by the state plan on the amount ofcombined income which an employee may receive under the state's plan and from the employer; 

• 
Benefits received (non-disability) for participation in military summer camp, riots, civil disturbances, etc. 

• 
Any disability plan toward which the Borough contributes one hundred ( I 00%) percent ofthe costs. 


Social Security Old-Age Benefits 
• Ifthe officer is age 62 but not yet 65, Salary Continuance payments are reduced by any Social Security Old-Age benefits, payable to the officer ifthe officer elects to begin receiving such benefits. 
• Ifthe officer is age 65 or older, Salary Continuance payments are reduced by any Social Security Old-Age benefits received or which the officer is eligible to receive. 
EXCLUSIONS 
Officers will not receive Salary Continuance payments for any period: 
• 
The officer engages in any work for wage or profit, except work approved by the Borough for rehabilitation; 

• 
The officer is not under the care ofa legally qualified physician. 


Salary Continuance benefits will not be paid if the disability is caused or 
contributed to by any of the following: 
• 
Intentionally self-inflicted injuries; 

• 
War, declared or undeclared, or any act or hazard ofwar; 

• 
Full-time active service in the armed forces ofany country; 

• 
Participation in, or as a consequence or participating in, the committing ofa felony. 



EVENTS WHICH MAY OR MAY NOT AFFECT YOUR COVERAGE -TEMPORARY ABSENCE FROM ACTIVE WORK 
Disability Absence 
If the officer is unable to perform the duties ofthe job and is under the 
care ofa legally qualified physician, he will receive Salary Continuance 
benefits as described in this section. 
Non-Medical Leave Without Pay 
Coverage continues for the first thirty (30) days of the officer's approved leave. 
Military Leave 
Coverage terminates on the last day worked. Military leave does not include summer camp or temporary duty ifless than four weeks per year. Coverage will be continued during this period. 
Layoff 
Coverage terminates on the last day worked. 
16 
Termination ofEmployment 
Salary Continuance coverage terminates on the officer's last day of employment regardless ofthe reason for termination. There is no conversion privilege for Salary Continuance coverage. 
Death 
Coverage terminates at death. 
SECTION 12. BEREAVEMENT PAY: 
A. Each police officer shall be entitled to a leave of absence of four ( 4) days at his regular wage ifthere is a death in the immediate family; three (3) days for the immediate family ofhis wife; and one (1) day for his aunt or uncle or spouse's aunt, uncle or grandparent. 
The immediate family ofthe officer is defined as spouse, mother, father, 
grandparents, grandchildren, sister, brother or child, or spouse ofany of 
the aforesaid. 
The immediate family ofthe officer's spouse is defined as spouse, mother, 
father, grandchildren, sister, brother or child, or spouse ofany ofthe 
aforesaid. 
SECTION 13. LIFE INSURANCE: 
A. RETIRED EMPLOYEES: The Borough shall provide without cost to each employee who retires under provision ofthe pension agreement a Five Thousand Dollar (5,000.00) life insurance policy benefit to be paid to the beneficiary at the time ofthe police officer's death. The five thousand dollar ($5,000.00) life insurance policy benefit for retirees does not have to be provided by the Borough in a separate policy. 
B. ACTIVE EMPLOYEES: The Borough will provide life insurance coverage ofFifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000.00) per active police officer with double indemnity, as provided in the group insurance plan in effect at the time ofthis Agreement. 
SECTION 14. RETIREMENT: 
Police retirement shall be governed by the applicable provisions ofAct 600 ofJuly 10, 1957, P.L. 676, (53 P.S. 767), as amended. 
A. Pension will be vested after twelve (12) years ofcontinuous service. 
B. Normal Retirement Age -Eligibility to retire at full pension will require twenty-five (25) years ofservice (purchase ofprior military service time shall not exclude a police officer from full retirement benefits at less than 25 years ofservice); and, having reached the age offifty ( 50) years. 
C. COLA -A cost of living adjustment for the pension plan will be provided for each retired officer, which shall be a percentage increase based upon the consumer price Index for each year. Pension plan cost ofliving adjustments shall not be provided to officers hired on or after January 1, 2011. 
D. Monthly Service Increment -Effective January 1, 1993, police officers who retire under the terms ofthis Agreement, who have completed twenty-six (26) years ofservice, will be paid a monthly service increment in the amount $100/month. Pension plan monthly service increments shall not be provided to officers hired on or after January 1, 2011. 
E. Social Security Offset -There shall be no social security offset against pension benefits ofany police officer who retires under the terms ofthis Agreement, and as defined in the Police Pension Plan. 
F. Survivor's Benefit -A survivor's benefit, as described under Act 600, will be available for all police officers who retire under the terms ofthis Agreement and as defined in the Police Pension Plan. 
G. Military Service Purchase toward Retirement -Effective January 1, 1996, police officers shall be eligible to receive, in determining the aggregate time ofservice in the computation ofretirement benefits, credit for service in the Armed Forces ofthe United States. Application for military service credit may be made at any time prior to the member retiring. The application for military service credit shall be accompanied by proper proof thereof. The member shall, upon request, have a period oftwenty­four (24) months from the date ofthe approval ofmilitary credit time, to pay the required sum ofsaid time, as hereinafter provided. The member desiring such military credit time shall pay therefore a sum equal to such amount as shall be determined by the actuary responsible for the administration ofthe retirement fund and which determination shall be consistent with normal and accepted actuarial practices. 
The amount oftime purchased shall be deducted from the 25 years of service requirement (but not the required age of 50), and will entitle the retiring officer to full retirement and applicable hospitalization benefits as provided for under the terms ofthis Agreement. 
Documentation -The police officer involved in utilizing military service 
for any ofthe preceding purposes shall be required to furnish the 
necessary documents to substantiate his or her claim to these benefits. 
H. The Borough will deposit into the Police Pension Fund the full amount of state aid received on behalfofthe Police Pension Fund each year. The amount ofstate aid deposited into the fund will be determined by taking the unit value established by the state times the number ofofficers certified by the state for that year times two (2). 
I. If, at any time during the period covered by this Agreement, the state offers a statewide retirement system for local police officers as on option to the Borough managed system, the Borough agrees to meet and discuss with the police the option ofparticipating in the plan. 
J. Contributions 
1. Mandatory Employee Contribution Amount -As a condition of participation in this Plan, each active participant must contribute, on an after-tax basis, a percentage ofhis/her compensation as established each year. In general, this mandatory contribution shall not exceed the maximum amount permitted under Act 600 of 1956. The Borough may reduce or eliminate the contribution required, provided all three (3) ofthe following requirements are satisfied: 
(a) 
The current actuarial study indicates the condition ofthe Plan is such that contributions may be reduced or eliminated; 

(b) 
Contributions by the Borough are not required to keep the Plan actuarially sound; and 

(
c) Any reduction ofelimination ofcontributions is authorized on an annual basis by an ordinance or resolution, which will be authorized by the Borough. 


2. Funding the Plan -The Plan shall be funded in the following order: 
(a) 
By payments made by the Treasurer ofthe Commonwealth to the Borough for the monies received from taxes paid upon premiums by foreign casualty insurance companies and from foreign fire insurance companies. The Borough's obligation to apply such monies to the Plan shall be limited, annually, to those monies flowing from the Commonwealth to the Borough because the Borough has a police force. The Borough is not required to direct all, or a part, ofsuch monies into the Plan, except that there shall be no "charge" against police officer compensation, as described in Section 

(1) above, in any year in which the Borough does not apply all foreign casualty and foreign fire insurance tax monies coming to it because it has a Police force to the Plan; 

(b) 
By a charge against each police officer's compensation in the amount determined to be necessary by the Plan actuary, which amount shall be limited to the maximum permitted under Act 600 of1956; 

(c) 
When necessary, by annual appropriations made by the Borough (i.e. when the Plan actuary determines the Plan needs a greater infusion offunds than will be provided through employee's contributions and the foreign casualty and foreign fire insurance monies which are applied to the Plan). 


SECTION 15. RESIDENCY: 
All Officers shall be required to reside within a twelve (I2) nautical air mile radius ofthe Plum Police Department pursuant to a Global Positioning System. All existing Officers who at the signing ofthis Agreement reside outside of the precise measurement are permitted to continue to reside in such residence, however, any Officer who resides outside ofthis precise measurement shall be required in the future to move into said radius of he/she elects to move in the future. It shall be the Officer' s responsibility to know the exact parameters ofthis radius both now and in the future. Any pending grievances on this issue are dismissed or withdrawn. 
SECTION 16. COMPENSATORY TIME: 
A police officer eligible for overtime compensation may elect at his option, to take compensatory time in lieu ofovertime. Compensatory time will be granted at the rate of one and one half(1 ½) hours for overtime worked per each hour/or part thereof. Compensatory time shall be given as determined by the Borough ofPlum and if requested by the police officer, in lieu ofsaid overtime. The maximum accumulation of compensatory time shall be two hundred and forty (240) hours, with the excess to be sold back at 100%. The administration ofcompensatory time will be governed by the Federal Fair Labor Standards Act. 
~ 
Each officer shall be entitled to use a maximum of72 hours ofcompensatory time per
( 
1 \ year from their personal bank ofhours regardless ofwhether or not the use ofsaid '---" compensatory time creates overtime. Officers shall not be permitted to schedule compensatory time more than ten (I 0) days in advance ofthe date when it will be taken. 
SECTION 17. GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE: 
A. For the purposes ofthis Agreement, the term "grievance" means any difference or dispute between the Borough ofPlum and any regular police officer with respect to the interpretation, application, claim, breach, or violation ofany ofthe provisions ofthis Agreement. 
B. Should a grievance arise between the Borough and the police officer, there shall be no suspension ofwork on account ofsuch grievance but the grievance shall be settled in accordance with the grievance procedure hereinafter set forth. 
C. The regular police officer shall designate to the Borough Manager a Grievance Committee composed ofnot more that three (3) regular police officers, one ofwhom shall be designated as Chairman. 
D. Any regular full-time police officer having a grievance shall first discuss the grievance with his superior in the chain ofcommand and if, after such discussion, satisfaction is not received, he may file his grievance in writing on a form agreed upon by the parties ofthis Agreement. Ifthe committee finds merit in this grievance, it shall follow that grievance to the next step. The following grievance steps shall be followed. 
1. 
The written grievance shall be given to the Borough Manager within (10) days from the occurrence ofthe grievance, and the same shall be considered in a meeting within seven (7) days thereafter by an authorized representative ofCouncil, the Mayor, Borough Manager, the Chairman ofthe Grievance Committee, and the aggrieved police officer. Within seven (7) days, thereafter, a decision shall be made by the authorized representative ofthe Council, Mayor and Borough Manager. 

2. 
In the event that the grievance has not been satisfactorily resolved in the above noted step ofthe grievance procedure, the Grievance Committee and the aggrieved police officer may jointly initiate an appeal by serving upon the Borough Manager a notice in writing of the intent to proceed to arbitration within fourteen (14) days after receipt ofthe above noted decision is due. 


a.  The arbitrator is to be selected by the parties jointly  
within seven (7) days after the notice has been  
given. If the parties fail to agree on an arbitrator,  
either party may request the American Arbitration  
Association to submit a list ofthree (3) arbitrators.  
b.  The parties shall meet within seven (7) days ofthe  
receipt ofsaid list for purposes ofselecting the  
arbitrator by alternating striking one name from the  
list, until only one name remains. The employer  
strikes the first name.  
c.  The arbitrator shall neither add to, subtract from,  
nor modify the provisions ofthis Agreement, or of  
any other arbitration awards. The arbitrator shall  
confine himselfto the precise issues submitted for  
arbitration. The arbitrator has no authority to  
determine any other issues not submitted to him.  
The decision ofthe arbitrator shall be requested to  
issue his decision within thirty (30) days after the  
hearing.  
d.  All fees and expenses ofthe arbitrator shall be  
divided equally between the parties. Each party  
shall bear the cost ofpreparing and presenting its  
own case.  

E. Discipline 
1. An officer may elect to contest discipline such as reduction in rank, suspension, or discharge either before the Civil Service Commission or through the Grievance Procedures set forth in Section 17. The officer may only select one ofthe two options, and whichever option the officer selects constitutes an irrevocable selection. A written warning shall not be grievable ifit is not used as a part ofprogressive discipline. 
SECTION 18. FALSE ARREST INSURANCE: 
The Borough shall provide each police officer with False Arrest Insurance in the amount of$250,000 per person and $500,000 per incident. 
The Borough will pay attorney's fees through and including the trial before any Court, including the Court ofCommon Pleas or Federal District Court, proceeding on the condition that said police officer is acquitted ofcharges arising out ofactions within the scope of employment. 
SECTION 19. TRAINING: 
22 
The officers are permitted to attend Firearms School once per year on Borough time. 
In the event any police officer is required by the Borough to attend any school, the 
Borough shall pay all legitimate expenses, including, but not limited to: food, lodging, 
and car expenses. The Borough shall have the right to set reasonable per diem and other 
expenses. 
SECTION 20. LEA VE FOR UNION BUSINESS: 
A. The Borough shall make every effort to permit, when on duty, the members ofthe Wage Policy Committee to attend all special meetings of the committee and to meet with individual officers during his or their tour ofduty when required. In no event shall these meetings interfere with the emergency operations ofthe police department. 
B. Those members serving as officers in the recognized collective bargaining unit for Plum Borough Officers or serving as an officer in any police fraternal organization shall receive necessary time offwithout loss of scheduled pay for up to three (3) days to attend meeting, conventions, or any other meetings that are scheduled or called for emergency purposes. Any expenses incurred while attending such gatherings shall be borne by the officer. Also, the officer must give due and timely notice of such events. 
SECTION 21. LENGTH OF CONTRACT: 
The effective date ofthis Agreement shall be from January 1, 2018 to December 31, 2022. 
SECTION 22. COMPLETE AGREEMENT: 
The parties acknowledge that during the process that resulted in this contract, each had the unlimited right and opportunity to make demands and proposals with respect to any subject or matter not moved by law from the area ofcollective bargaining and that the understandings and agreements anived at by the parties after the exercise ofthat right and opportunity are set forth in the Agreement that represents the complete agreement of the parties. As a result, each party hereby waives the right to require the other party to negotiate any terms which are set forth in the Agreement. 
SECTION 23. CURRENT BENEFITS: 
All terms and conditions of employment in effect shall remain in effect, except insofar as those terms and conditions ofemployment are specifically altered by this Award. 
Any and all demands and issues in dispute by either party not specifically incorporated in this Award are hereby denied and rejected. 
SECTION 24. SEVERABILITY: 
Should any Article, Section or portion thereof ofthis Agreement be held unlawful and/or unenforceable by any court ofcompetent jurisdiction, such decision shall only apply to the specific Article, Section, or portion thereof directly specified in the decision. The remainder ofthe Agreement shall remain in full force and effect for the entire term of this Agreement. 
SECTION 25. ALL OTHER MATTERS: 
All terms and conditions ofemployment encompassed by the prior Agreement or in effect during its term and that are not altered by the Award shall remain in full force and effect. Unless otherwise stated, all ofthe foregoing takes effect on January 1, 2014. All other requests, proposals, and demands not previously agreed upon or specifically addressed herein shall be considered DENIED and REJECTED. 
Jurisdiction: The Board ofArbitration shall retain jurisdiction over this matter until both parties have ratified and executed a new agreement incorporating the terms and conditions ofthis Award. 
FOR THE POLICE DEPARTMENT FOR THE BOROUGH OF PLUM 


