COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENT 
FOR THE YEARS 
2021 

BY AND BETWEEN !THE BOROUGH OF TURTLE CREEK 
AND 
Tl-IE TURTLE CREEK BOROUGH POLICE DEPARTMENT 
PREAMBLE 
WHERAS, the Borough of Turtle Creek and the Turtle Creek Borough Police Department have, over the years, entered into various agreements concerning wages, fringe benefits, hours of employment, and other terms and conditions of employment; and 
WHERAS, various awards of arbitration have been handed down concerning police wages and fringe benefits, hours of employment, and the terms and conditions of employment; and 
WHERAS, the Borough, the Full-Time Police, and the Part-Time Police, who are represented by the Full-Time Police, seek now to enter into an agreement covering all areas of wages, fringe benefits, hours of employment, and other terms and conditions of employment as established by the various awards and prior practices. 
WHERAS, THEREFORE, THE FOLLOWING IS MUTUALLY AGREED AS FOLLOWS; 

ARTICLE I 
TERM OF AGREEMENT 
THE TERM OF THIS AGREEMENT SHALL BE FOR A PERIOD OF ONE (1) YEAR, BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2021 AND ENDING ON DECEMBER 31, 2021. 

ARTICLE II COMPENSATION 
A. Salaries-Full-Time Patrolman 
2021 -January 1, 2021 Two and One Quarter Percent-$64,463.00 July 1, 2021-One Quarter Percent Increase -$64,624.00 
B.oStarting WagE?S and Classifications for New Hireso
1)oPatrolman I -Probationary Officer, Zero to Six Months-Part-Time Hourly Rate in theocalendar year of hiring, plus $0.50 per hour.o
2)oPatrolman II -Six Months to Twelve Months -Seventy (70) Percent of Patrolman IV base salary.o
3)oPatrolman Ill -Twelve Months to Twenty Four Months -Seventy Five (75) Percent ofoPatrolman IV base salary.o
4) Patrolman IV -After Twenty Four Months -Full Rateo
C. Part-Time Wages 
2021 -January 1, 2021 -Two and One Quarter Percent Increase -$19.27 per hour July 1, 2021-One Quarter Percent Increase -$19.32 per hour 
D. Longevity Pay 
In addition to wages, full-time employees shall receive longevity pay in the amount of Fifty 
(50)oDollars per year of employment, up to a maximum of Twenty Five (25) years of service,oor One Thousand (1000) Dollars. This benefit begins only after the fifth (5) year of service.o
; 
E. Overtime 
1)oEmployees, including part-time police, shall be paid at the rate of time and one half for allohours worked In excess of forty (40) hours in any work week, or in excess of eight (8) hoursoin any work day.o
2)oAny full-time officer eligible for overtime compensation may elect at his option, to takeocompensatory time in lieu of overtime. Compensatory time cannot exceed forty (40) hoursomaximum accumulation. To the extent to which it exceeds forty (40) hours it is lost.oCompensatory time will be granted at the rate of time and one half for overtime workedoper each hour.o
3)oThe officer, prior to taking compensatory time off shalt give twelve (12) hours notificationoto the Chief of Police. However, in cases of exigent circumstances, it shall be left to theodiscretion of the Chief of Police whether compensatory time shall be granted with lessothan twelve (12) hours notification.o
4) If the Chief of Police denies a request for compensatory time off, he shall, in writing,oexplain the reason for the denial.o
F. Overtime/Extra Dutyo
1) A police officer sha II be paid at the rate of time and one half for a II hours worked inoexcess of forty (40) hours in any work week, or in excess of eight (8) hours in any worko
day.o
2)oWith respect to overtime or extra duty, seniority on a rotating basis shall be the first andoand primary consideration in assigning overtime.o
3)oThe Mayor shall maintain a chart, which shall be posted within the police office. It shall beoopen to all police for inspection at all times. This chart shall list the names of all policeoofficers, both fu11-time and part-time. The names of the full-time police shall be listed firstoby order of'seniority. They shall then be followed by the names of the part-time police by order of ser'1iority.o
4)oIn the event of a call off, or the availability of extra duty, this list shall be followed in itsodesignated order. Once the particular assignment has been filled, the name next on theolist shall have the right of first refusal for any future call offs or extra duty that becomesoavailable.o
5)oIf the officer next in line for overtime or extra duty is already currently on duty, or isoscheduled to work that particular day, it shall be left to the discretion of that officerowhether to accept or refuse the overtime or extra duty.o
6)eOvertime and extra duty shall be distributed equally and fairly to all police on aeregular basis and that seniority shall govern first preference on a rotating basis.e
7)eIn the event that an officer or officers are placed on an on call status or on a stand byestatus, which shall place restrictions on his or her personal time, the officer or officerseshall be compensated for the period of time in which their personal time is restricted.eCompensation shall be in the form of compensatory time.e
8)eA part-time officer may work in excess of thirty two (32) hours in one work week if thateofficer is called into work from the overtime chart.e
9)eAny police officer who is called into work for any reason, shall receive a minimum of foure
(4) hours pay at the regular hourly rate. However, if the time worked exceeds four (4) hours, the officer shall be compensated at time and one half for all hours worked.e
G. Miscellaneous Compensation 
1)eOfficer in Charge -Any full-time patrolman required to serve in a supervisory capacity,eshall receive an additional rate of $0.61 per hour for the time in said supervisory capacity.e
2) Shift Differential -Full-time patrolman shall receive an additional $0.68 per hour shiftedifferential for shifts between the hours of 3:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. When an officereworks first shift, 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. and then works overtime, he shall not receiveedifferential pay for his overtime.e
3} Holiday Pay-If regular scheduled day off, vacation or holiday, hourly wage rate atestandard amount is paid. Full-time officers who work a paid holiday shall be paid at thee
rate of time and one half. At the end of the calendar year, nine (9} accumulated paide
holidays are lump summed and included in the first pay of December as is the longevityepay.e
4) Attendance at Criminal Proceeding Under Subpoena to Testify for the Prosecution 
a) Magistrate Hearings -Any officer required to appear before a magistrate or at aemagistrates hearing on off duty time, shall receive a minimum of two (2) hours pay atethe standard rate. If the time spent exceeds two (2) hours, the officer shalt beecompensated at time and one half for all time spent.e
b)o
Court Days -All appearances in Commonwealth Court, City Court, Federal Court,o302 Hearing, shall be compensated at five (5) hours at time and one half rate. Theopractice of attending pre-trial screenings, effective January 1, 2015 and thereafter,owill only be approved with written documentation by the District Attorney's Office.oAttendance shall be compensated at five (5) hours at overtime rate. Reportsopertaining to pre-trial, effective January 1, 2015 and thereafter, must be faxed.o

c)o
When a police officer is required to transport evidence to the Allegheny CountyoCrime Lab, he shall receive two (2) hours pay at the regular rate. These hours shallonot be compensated at an overtime rate even if they ca use the officer to exceedoforty (40) hours in a given week.o

d) 
All police officers shall be reimbursed for parking expenses for all court appearances,oincluding trips to the Allegheny County Crime Lab. The officer is required to provide aoparking lot receipt to the Borough. A reimbursement check shall be issued to eachoofficer at the end of each month which shall not be part of the officers regular pay.o

a)o
Part-Time Police must work a minimum of two hundred (200) hours in the previous yearobefore obtaining a uniform voucher.o

b)o
In the case of a new part-time hire, the officer shall be given a voucher to obtain two (2)ouniform shirts, and two (2) uniform pants. The voucher shall not exceed One Hundred Fiftyo( 150) Dollars.o

c)o
Prior to the purchase of any uniform or related item, the police officer prior to obtaining aopurchase order, shall submit to the Mayor or his/her designee, a list of items he intends toopurchase. The Mayor or his/her designee shall then submit said list of approved items toothe Borough Office who shall then issue a purchase order to the officers for only thoseoitems, or at the officers request, fax said purchase order to the vendor of the officersochoice. Only those items on said purchase order will be honored by the vendor.o


5. Uniform Allotment  
Full-Time Policeo Part-Time Police  
2019 -$950.00o 2019 -$575.00  
2020 -$950.00o 2020-$575.00  


ARTICLE Ill BENEFITS 
A) Vacations 
The following vacation schedule shall be adhered to based upon years offull-time service.oAfter One (1) Year-One (1) WeekoTwo (2) Years through Five (5) Years -Two (2) Weekso
Six {6) Years through Twelve (12) Years -Three (3) WeeksoThirteen (13) Years through Nineteen (19) Years -Four (4) WeeksoTwenty (20) Years and after -Five (5) Weekso
FulI-Time Officers shall also be entitled to Five (5) personal days off per year. 
The Mayor shall establish a vacation schedule. However, the Mayor shall be reasonable in his/her decisions to schedule vacations so as not to be unmindful of the wishes of all persons on the police department. Moreover, the Mayor shall be reasonable in his/her determinations of when vacations shall be taken and shall take reasonable steps to provide the vacation time requested by an officer so long as it does not interfere with the smooth functioning of the police department as a whole. The Mayor shall exercise his/her discretion to assure that there shall be a suitable number of police officers on duty at all times for the safety of the Borough. 
B) Holidays and 1:1ersonal Days 
1) Holidays 
a)o
The full-time members of the police department shall receive nine (9) holidays per year:o

b)o
Full Time Officers Anniversary Date of Hire -At the officers choosing, he may elect ono


1)oNew Year's Day  6)oVeterans Dayo 
2)oEastero 7)oThanksgivingo 
3)oMemorial Dayo 8)oChristmaso 
4)oFourth of Julyo 9)oEmployee's Birthdayo 
5)oLabor Dayo 

his Anniversary Date of Hire to either take that day as a paid day off, or if he chooses toowork, he shall be compensated at the rate of time and one half. If said day should falloon the officers pass days, he shall receive eight (8) hours of compensatory time. Nooadditional compensation shall be required.o
2}iBereavement Leave -Each full-time officer shall be entitled to three (3) days off forithe death and funeral of anyone in his immediate family. Immediate family shall beideemed to include spouse, child, parent, brother, sister, foster chitd, step parent,i
step child, or any lineal. The three (3) days shall terminate with the date of the funeral.i
If any of the three (3) days do not coincide with the days when the officer is scheduledi
to work, they shall not be entitled to any extra pay by virtue of this section.i
3) Jury Duty In the event any full-time officer is called for jury duty, he shall be entitled toireceive the difference between the amount paid by the summoning authority and theiamount paid under his regular rate of pay. The officer when summoned for jury dutyineed not work during the twenty four (24) hour period on the same day when he isi
attending jury duty, but shall receive the pay as outlined herein. For purposes of thisisection, the officer working third shift (11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) shall be deemed toiworking only on the date when the hours of work are 12:00 a.m. to 7:00 a.m.i
4)iLeave Granted to FOP Representative -The department representative to theiFraternal Order of Police, with consent of the Chief of Police, is granted four (4) hoursipaid leave to attend the regular scheduled monthly meeting. The Borough is under noiobligation to replace the officer, but may do so at the discretion of the Chief of Police.i
5) Acting Chief of Police -If the Chief of Police is unavailable for an extended period ofitime, five (5) consecutive days, or at the discretion of the Mayor, the senior officer,iwhile serving in the capacity of the Chief of Police, shall receive the same hourly rate ofipay as the Chief of Police.i
C) Sick Leave 
1)iEach full-time officer shall be entitled to thirteen (13) sick days per year, which can beiaccumulated to an amount of seventy five (75) days, but said accumulation shall notiexceed seventy five (75} days. An officer may use only thirty (30) days of accumulatedisick leave in one year, unless suffering from an extended illness: in such event he may useiall seventy five (75) days in one calendar year, but only with the approval of Council, and iniCouncils sole discretion. An employee shall not be deemed to be "sick" unless he isiphysically unable to perform his duties.i
2)iAt the option of a full-time officer, he may once annually sell back up to ten (10) of hisiannually allocated sick days at seventy five (75) percent of the hourly rate of when theyiwere earned. The officer must give notice of his intention to sell back days no later thaniJanuary 31st of each calendar year.i
3)oUpon retirement, an officer may sell back a maximum of Sixty (60) accumulated sickodays at Fifty (50) Percent of the officers average hourly salary over the previous threeo
(3) 
years.o

4)o
Sick days shall not be credited for the purposes of calculating overtime.o


D} Insurance 
1)oThe Borough shall continue to provide to Full-Time Officers health care coverage.o
If said coverage should include a deductible, the employee shall be responsible forothe following; 2017 -Forty (40) Percent of the deductible or $1,200.00. In 2018, Fiftyo(SO) Percent of the deductible or $1,500.00.o
The Borough shall continue to reimburse the employee the difference in the Co-Pays 
from the previous Health America Flex Choice Plan to the current plan, Pa HCR Silver 
Flex Choice PPO 1500 Plan. (Deleted from contract, 2019 agreement) 
The Borough shall meet with representative of the Turtle Creek Wage and Policy 
Committee to discuss a change to a comparable healthcare plan. The Borough shall 
provide the Union with a side by side comparison of the current plan (see Attached), 
and the proposed plan. The Borough shall also make available a representative from the 
proposed plan to explain it to the employees. If the Union and the Borough are unable to 
agree upon such change, the Union retains the right to grieve the Borough's 
determination that the plan is "comparable". If the Union does not agree that a plan 
selected by the Borough is "comparable", the Union will so state, in writing, to the 
Borough, within Seven (7) Calendar Days of the plan being presented to the Union by the 
Borough, or such longer period as mutually agreed to by the parties in writing. In the 
event that the Union does not agree with the Borough's "comparability" determination, it 
may immediately process the dispute before a neutral arbitrator selected pursuant to the 
arbitration step of the grievance procedure. The cost of arbitration, for the purpose of this 
section only, will be shared at the rate of Seventy (70) Percent Borough, and Thirty (30) 
Percent Turtle Creek Borough Police Officers Association. The decision of the arbitrator on 
this "comparable" issue shall be final and binding and will determine if the Borough is 
authorized to implement the new plan. 
a)o
The Borough will provide an annual cash payment in the amount of $1,500.00 tooFull-Time employees who are covered for health care insurance through their spouse.oEvidence of coverage must be provided prior to payment. The officer shall have the rightoto reenter the plan provided by the Borough in the event that his spouse's coverage isoterminated for any reason. The officer shall have the option of having this benefit paidoeither in one lump sum annually in the first pay in December, or in two (2) equal lumposum payments to be made in the first pay period in July, and the first pay period inoDecember.o

b) 
Dental Coverage -The Borough agrees to provide family dental coverage for Full-TimeoPolice Officers. The provided plan shall be Concordia Flex F-8W Plan.o

c) 
Eye Care -The Borough agrees to provide family eye care coverage for Full-TimeoPolice Officerso

d)o
Disability Injury/Non Work Related Insurance -If any Full-Time Officer becomes disabledoor is unable to work owing to an off duty disability arising from any nature, the Boroughoshall continue wage payment in the amount of Fifty (50) Percent of his regular wages foroand during the term of an insurance policy the Borough maintains with Assurity InsuranceoCo. for sup'plemental pay in the amount of $800.00 per month.o


An employee must work a minimum of thirteen (13) pay periods or 1040 hours in the previous year to earn his vacation time for the following year. If an employee misses work due to a non-work related disability arising from any nature, the officer shall be penalized One (1) vacation day in the following year for each pay period not worked in the current year. The employee shall not be penalized for days missed due to work related disability of any nature. 
e)oUpon retirement, the Borough shall continue to pay hospitalization premiums for theoofficer until the officer qualifies for Medicare. In addition, the Borough shall provide aoreimbursable payment of $300.00 per month to the retiree to cover spousal health careocosts. this payment shall end upon the retiree, or the retirees spouse qualifying foroMedicare, or in the event of the death of the employee and or spouse.o
If a retired officer finds post-retirement employment that provides equal or better health 
care benefits as provided by the Borough, the retiree shall be required to enroll in that 
plan. In the event those benefits end prior to the retiree reaching Medicare eligibility, he 
may reenroll into the Borough plan until he qualifies for Medicare. 
If the spouse of a retiree is covered by equal or better health care coverage than provided by the Borough, and the retiree is able to enroll in the spouses plan, the retiree must do so. The retiree would then be eligible to receive the cash payment of $1,500.00 as stated in Section D, Subsection la. 
2) Life Insurance -The Borough shall provide and pay for all premiums of insurance so thataeach Full-Time Officer, while an active duty employee of the Borough, shall be insured inathe amount of $25,000.00 with double indemnity protection. Upon retirement, of anaemployee, the Borough shall provide $10,000.00 life insurance coverage, premium to beapaid by the Borough.a
3)aFalse Arrest Insurance -The Borough shall continue the False Arrest Liability Insurance onaall police activities. A copy of the insurance policy shall be provided to the Bargaining Unit.a
ARTICLE IV WORKING CONDITIONS 
A} Hours of Work -The normal work week shall consist of eight (8) consecutive hours of work.a
The normal work week shall consist of Five (5) consecutive eight (8) hour days, totaling Fortya
(40) hours. A predetermined cycle of work days and days off shall be established by theaMayor. The work week begins on Saturday at 11:00 p.m. and ends the following Saturday ata
11:00 p.m.a
B) Conduct -The Borough reserves to itself the right as it has done in the past, to promulgateaby resolution of the Council, rules and regulations covering the personal conduct of pollceaofficers, the use of equipment, and any and all other matters which it deems necessary to the administration of the police force. a copy of these rules for conduct has been madeaavailable to th'e unit.a
C) Shift Preference -The Mayor will set shifts of Five (5) consecutive days and the police willaselect by seniority. The Five (5) days must be for the same shift in each day with the sameastarting time and the same ending time, unless overtime is involved. The Five (5) consecutiveadays need not be In the same work week.a
Shift bids will be submitted to the Mayor annually on or before December 1st of each calendar year. The schedule shall then become effective the first day of the first new pay period of the new year. 
If the Mayor should change the schedule, it shall be re-bid. Full-Time officers may agree to trade shifts on a day for a day basis subject to the following restrictions: 
1)eThe exchange may only be on a One (1) day for One (1) day basis.e
2)eThe exchange will not result in any overtime.e
3)eNo less than Forty Eight (48) hours' notice must be given to the Chief of Police prior to theestart of the first shift affected.e
4)eIf the above three criteria are met, the exchange will be approved by the Chief of Policeeunless it unduly interferes with the operations of the police department. If permission isenot granted by the Chief of Police, he will be obliged to state his reasons in writing.e
D) Contracted Police Services -If at any time the Borough of Turtle Creek agrees to provideeservices to another community, the Borough shall be required to engage in collectiveebargaining with the Police Officers Association with regards to wages only. Collectiveebargaining shall be initiated by the Borough within Thirty (30) days of any agreement toeprovide police services. If the Borough fails to initiate collective bargaining, the PoliceeOfficers Association shall have the right to request binding arbitration under the provisionseof ACT 111.e
E) Attendance at Mandatory Training-The Borough, in addition to wages, shall cover any andeall costs pertaining to attendance of annual mandatory in-service training.e
Part-Time Officers shall be required to work a minimum of Two Hundred (200) Hours in the previous year before being eligible for compensation for attending mandatory in-service 
training. 
ARTICLE V 
PENSION FUND 
The Borough Pension Ordinance shall be the controlling document of reference pertaining to the benefits and operating procedures of the pension. The Borough shall be required to notify the Police Association, in writing, as to any proposed changes to the Pension Ordinance. The 
Police Association shall be required to sign off on any changes to the ordinance before any 
changes can take effect. 
The parties hereto acknowledge that the Borough has established two (2) pension plans, one of which is being administered by the Indiana Standard Insurance Co. and the other by the Borough of Turtle Creek. 
It is further agreed that the retirement review board shall consist of one (1) police representative, one (1) member of council, and one (1) citizen solicited by both parties. Said board shall serve in an advisory capacity only. 
Police officers are entitled to retirement at age Fifty (SO) after Twenty Five (25) years of service. 
Police officers are also entitled to an early retirement pursuant to ACT 24 after Twenty (20) years of service at an actuarially reduced rate. This benefit is to begin at the time of retirement. 
Police officers are entitled to a service increment in the amount of $100.00 per month for each completed year of service in excess of Twenty Five (25) years of service, not to exceed $100.00 per month, and shall be paid in addition to the amount of the Normal Retirement Benefit. 
Disability pensions shall be based on Fifty (50) percent of the officer's final average salary over his last Thirty Six (36) months of employment. 

ARTICLE VI MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
A} Part-Time Patrolman -The Borough has the right to employ and use part-time patrolman.eThe Borough shall not deprive full-time patrolman overtime by excessively distributing worketo part-time patrolman. Part-time policemen shall be entitled to work Thirty (30) hours pereweek. Part-time police may not be assigned work in excess of Thirty Two (32) hours per weekewhen it shall deny overtime work to full-time officers.e
B) Scheduling-Scheduling is and shall remain, solely within the discretion and exclusive controleof the Mayor.e
C)eNo Strike Clause -The parties hereto agree that there shall be no strike, work stoppage, slowedowns, sit downs, or picketing by employees or their representatives. Furthermore, there willebe no lockouts by the Borough.e
D)eGrievance Procedure -Any member of the bargaining unit, excluding retired officers, shallehave the right' to file a grievance covering a violation of this agreement, or the interpretationeto be placed on this agreement, however, officers shall not have the right to grieve matterseof discipline. A grievance must be filed within Ten (10) days of the event which led to theegrievance. A copy of each grievance shall also be filed with the Borough Administrator.e
Step 1-The grievance shall be filed in writing to the Mayor. If the Mayor does not respond to the grievance in writing within Ten (10) days of its filing, the grievance shall be deemed to be denied and will then be submitted to borough Council. 
Step 2 -Borough Council will have Fifteen (15) days to meet with the aggrieved party and fifteen (15) days thereafter to render a decision. 
Step 3 -If the aggrieved party is unsatisfied with the response of Borough Council, he shall 
have the right within Thirty (30) days of Council's decision to file a request for binding 
arbitration with the American Arbitration Association. The parties agree to abide by the 
arbitration award, which shall be final, binding, and not subject to review. The cost of the 
arbitration proceeding shall be equally divided between the parties. Each party shall be 
responsible for paying its respective representatives or attorney. 
The time limits specified here are calendar days and are to be strictly adhered to, so as to assure an orderly and reasonably prompt solution to any problems that arise during the life of the contract. Therefore, any failure to live up to the time limits shall constitute 
resolution of the grievance and may so be enforced. 
This grievance procedure is not intended to and shall not be used to replace civil service laws, rules, and regulations thereunder. 
E) Reimbursement for Training/Meals 
1)oAny officer required to stay overnight for any training seminar, the Borough shall provideolodging, and Fifty (50) Dollars per day for meals for each required day of attendance at saidoseminar. In addition, if the officer is required to use his personal vehicle, he shall beoreimbursed for fuel and compensated for mileage at the IRS regulated rate. Prior approvaloand documentation are required.o
2)oAny officer while attending a criminal proceeding or training class that goes beyondo
12:00 p.m. shall be reimbursed for meals. The officer is permitted up to Ten (10) Dollarsoper day. A receipt must be furnished to the Borough. Reimbursement will be made byoseparate check at the end of each month.o
ARTICLE VII Bill OF RIGHTS 
1)oIf a complaint is filed against a police officer, the complaint must be filed in writing and aocopy of said complaint must be provided to the officer if in the event an investigation isoopened concerning the complaint, or if it is to be added to the officers personnel file. If theocomplaint is not in writing, it shall be deemed unfounded. Anonymous complaints shall beodeemed unfounded.o
2)A police officer, before being interrogated as a subject of an 1nvestigation or a witnessothereto, must be informed of the nature of the investigation and the subject matter of theointerrogation.o
3)oA police officer is entitled to a copy of any written statement he submits to the Borough asowell as a transcript of any recorded testimony he gives during interrogation. The Borougho
shall bear the cost of said transcript. 
However, if the testimony is tape recorded, then the Borough is only required to give the officer a copy of the recording and is not required to provide a typewritten transcript. 
4)oIf a police officer is a suspect of an investigation which may lead to criminal charges or theoarrest of the officer, he shall be completely informed of all his rights prior to beingointerrogated.o
5)oAny police officer who is to be interrogated shall have the right to be represented duringothe interrogation by either an attorney of his choice or a member of the Fraternal Order ofoPolice who shall be present at all time during the interrogation. The cost of the attorneyo
shall be paid completely by the officer. The interrogation shall be suspended for a reasonableotime to allow the officer the chance to obtain representation.o
6)oUnless the police officer agrees, the Borough shall not make any public comment on theoreason for any disciplinary action being sought against an officer.o
7}oA police officer shall have the right to review his personnel file but only during regularobusiness hours (8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday) and said review must beomade at the Borough Business Office. The officer may not remove his personnel file fromothe Borough Building.o


ARTICLE VIII SAVINGS CLAUSE 
If any part of this agreement shall be determined to null and void by any act of an arbitrator or court, it shall not affect any other terms of this agreement. Any and all other terms shall remain in full force and effect. 







